
Transcribers Note:

-Bold text is noted with = tags





    A COMPREHENSIVE
    GUIDE-BOOK to Natural
    Hygienic and Humane Diet


    By SIDNEY H. BEARD,

    _(Editor of "The Herald of the Golden Age.")_

    SEVENTH EDITION.
    (Fortieth Thousand.)
    PRICE TWO SHILLINGS (50 cents net.)

    THE ORDER OF THE GOLDEN AGE,
    153, 155, Brompton Rd., London, S.W.

    London Agent--R. J. James, 10, 11, 12 Ivy Lane, E.C.




    COPYRIGHT

    BY

    SIDNEY H. BEARD.

    _All rights reserved._




DEDICATION.


To all God's Sons and Daughters of Compassion, who are striving to
lessen the travail and pain of the sentient creation, and to establish
upon Earth the "King's Peace."

    "There hath been slaughter for the sacrifice
    And slaying for the meat, but henceforth none
    Shall spill the blood of life, nor taste of flesh;
    Seeing that knowledge grows, and life is one,
    And Mercy cometh to the merciful."




=CONTENTS.=


    The True Ideal in Diet                        13
    A Plea for the Simple Life                    22
    A Plea for Moderation                         26
    Artistic Cookery                              28
    What to do when Travelling                    32
    Advice for Beginners                          36
    Commercial Dietetic Inventions                38
    How to Regulate our Diet                      41
    A Simple Food-Chart                           45
    A Table of Food Values                        46
    Vegetarian Soups                              48
    Substitutes for Fish                          55
    Substitutes for Meat Dishes                   58
    Simple Savoury Dishes                         69
    Cold Luncheon Dishes                          86
    Gravies and Sauces                            94
    Puddings and Sweets                           99
    Bread and Cakes                              112
    Summer and Winter Drinks                     117
    How to Feed Invalids                         119
    What to do at Christmas                      126
    Breakfast, Luncheon and Dinner Menus         128
    Hints to Housekeepers                        131
    Unfired and Vital Foods                      133
    Some Suggestive Menus                        135
    Useful Domestic Information                  137
    Scientific Cooking of Vegetables             140
    Labour-Saving Appliances                     144
    Medicinal and Dietetic Qualities of Foods    146
    Hygienic Information                         152
    How to accumulate Physical Vitality          155

For Synopsis of Recipes, see next page. (Index, 159.)




SYNOPSIS OF RECIPES.


    =Breakfast Dishes=, 81, 82, 84, 86 to 88, 98, 104, 105, 113, 116,
     122, 128, 144, 145, 150, 152, 154.

    =Cold Luncheon Dishes=, 131 to 156.

    =Hot Luncheon Dishes=, 66 to 130.

    =Recipes for Cottage Dinners=, 39, 49, 54, 55 to 57, 61, 62, 64,
    66, 67, 69 to 79, 81 to 83, 87, 90, 101, 102, 106 to 112, 119 to 122,
    124, 125, 130, 144 to 153.

    =Recipes for Household Dinners=, 1 to 130, 157 to 224.

    =Recipes for Soups=, 1 to 23.

    =Picnic Recipes=, 131 to 156.

    =Recipes for Invalids=, 1 to 23, 66 to 130, 233 to 249.

    =Recipes for Travellers=, 142 to 148, 150 to 152.

    =Simple Supper Dishes=, 66 to 77, 79 to 84, 86 to 88, 90 to 98, 100,
    101, 104, 105, 107 to 111, 116 to 118, 120 to 125, 128 to 130, 184,
    185, 188, 193, 194, 196 to 202, 205.

    =Summer and Winter Drinks=, 233 to 238.

    =Recipes for making Bread and Cakes=, 225 to 232.

    =A Menu for Christmas=, 250 (page 127).

    =Breakfast, Luncheon and Dinner Menus=, page 128.

    =Unfired Food Menus=, page 135.




=PREFACE TO SEVENTH EDITION.=


[Illustration]

Dietetic Reform is now being considered seriously by thoughtful people
in all parts of the world and interest in this important though long
neglected subject is increasing every day.

The fact that our physical, mental, and spiritual conditions are
greatly influenced by the nature and quality of our daily food, and
that, consequently, our welfare depends upon a wise selection of the
same, is becoming generally recognized.

Popular illusions concerning the value of flesh-food have been much
dispelled during recent years by revelations concerning the physical
deterioration of the flesh-consuming nations, and the comparative
immunity from disease of people who live on purer and more natural
food; also by a succession of remarkable victories won by fruitarians
who have secured numerous athletic Championships and long distance
Records.

Demonstration has been provided by the Japanese, that a
non-carnivorous and hygienic Race can out-march and out-fight the
numerically superior forces of a colossal Empire; and that its
national and social life can be characterized by conspicuous
efficiency, sobriety, health, and vitality.

A vast amount of emphatic personal and medical testimony to the
advantages of the more simple and natural _fruitarian_ system of
living is being given by thousands of witnesses who speak from
experience; and such evidence is preparing the way for a complete
change of popular thought and custom concerning dietetics.

In addition to such influences, an ever-increasing consciousness that
the emancipation of the animal world from systematic massacre and
ruthless cruelty awaits the abandonment of the carnivorous habit by
the Western races of mankind, is exercising a powerful effect upon the
lives of multitudes of men and women. In consequence of having reached
a comparatively advanced stage of evolution, they realise the
solidarity of sentient life and feel humanely disposed towards all
fellow-creatures; and they cannot avoid the conviction that Man was
never intended to play the part of a remorseless and bloodthirsty
oppressor of the sub-human races.

Those who are labouring to bring about the adoption of dietetic
customs that neither violate the physical laws of our being, nor
outrage the humane sentiments of the higher part of our nature, are
consequently now met by serious requests for information concerning
some way of escape from bondage to ancestral barbaric custom, and the
safest path to a more rational and harmonious existence. "How may we
live out our full length of days in health and vigour, instead of
dying of disease?" "How may we avoid the painful maladies that are
prevalent, and escape the surgeon's knife?" "How may we be delivered
from further participation in all this needless shedding of innocent
blood?" "How may we in a scientific way feed ourselves with simple and
hygienic food--with the kindly fruits of the earth instead of the
flesh of murdered creatures who love life just as we do?" Such
questions as these are being asked by thousands of earnest souls, and
it is to help such enquirers that this Guide-Book is published.

My aim has been to give practical, reliable and up-to-date information
in a concise form, avoiding superfluous matter and 'faddism,' and only
supplying simple recipes which do not require the skill of a 'chef'
for their interpretation. By spending a few hours in thoughtful study
of the following pages, and by practising this reformed system of diet
and cookery in domestic life for a few weeks, any intelligent person
can master the chief principles of fruitarian dietetics, and become
qualified to prepare appetising dishes suited to the taste of a hermit
or a _bon vivant_ (provided that its possessor be not hopelessly
enamoured of the "flesh-pots of Egypt" and the flavour of cooked
blood).

A system of living that is earnestly recommended by thousands of
disinterested advocates who have personally tried it, that comes to us
full of promise both for ourselves and others, that bids fair to
humanize and transform mankind and to solve many of the world's
social problems, and that is now endorsed by so many progressive
medical authorities, merits such attention, and is worthy of trial.

As I am writing a _Guide_ to reformed diet for domestic use--not an
elaborate treatise to justify it--I have refrained from introducing
medical and experimental testimony concerning the dangerous and
injurious nature of flesh-food, and the advantages of living upon the
fruits of the earth, supplemented by dairy products. Numerous standard
works are now obtainable which demonstrate that the principles and
arguments upon which the Food-Reform Movement is based are supported
by an array of scientific evidence which is more than sufficient to
convince any unprejudiced, logical and well-balanced mind. For such
information I must refer my readers to other publications, and I have
printed a short list of useful works on the final pages of this book,
for the benefit of those who are as yet unacquainted with such
literature.

For some of the recipes contained in the following pages I am indebted
to certain of the Members of The Order of the Golden Age, and to other
workers in the Food-Reform Cause--but especially to Mrs. Walter Carey,
who has devoted much time to the task of preparing and testing them.
Most of them are original, being the result of thoughtful experiment;
and they should, _if carefully followed_, result in the production of
dishes which will give satisfaction. But if certain recipes do not
commend themselves to some of my readers, they are invited to
remember that human palates differ considerably, and to try other
dishes with the hope that they will like them better.

With the earnest desire that all who read this book will make some
sincere endeavour to seek emancipation from the barbaric habits that
are prevalent in Western lands, and to cease from that physical
transgression in the matter of diet into which our forefathers, at
some period of the world's history, appear to have fallen with such
disastrous consequences to themselves and their posterity, it is sent
forth upon its humble but beneficent mission. And I trust that many,
when they have proved that such a way of living is both possible and
advantageous, will strive to persuade others to live as Children of
God, rather than as the beasts of prey.

Those who have reached that spiritual plane where the sacredness of
all sentient life becomes recognised, and who find it painful to
contemplate the wanton and cruel slaughter which at present takes
place throughout Christendom--involving the death of at least a
million large animals every day--must instinctively experience a
longing to apprehend some way by which this butchery can be brought to
an end. Such will be able to perceive the real significance of, and
necessity for, the twentieth-century crusade against human
carnivoracity--the Moloch idol of these modern days. They will also
feel individually constrained to co-operate in the great work of
bringing about this practical and beneficent Reformation, and of
giving to mankind the blessings that will result from it.

As in the case of all previous editions of this book, any financial
profit derived from its sale will be devoted to the exaltation of
these humane and philanthropic ideals--hence its presentation to The
Order of the Golden Age. My readers, therefore, who feel that its
circulation will tend to lessen the sum total of human and sub-human
suffering, are invited to assist in securing for it a large
circulation, by lending or presenting copies to their friends, and
making it widely known. And to attain this end, the sympathetic aid of
journalists and other leaders of public thought will be especially
appreciated.

    =SIDNEY H. BEARD.=
    _January, 1913._




=THE TRUE IDEAL IN DIET.=


[Illustration: Man is by Nature Fruitarian--_not_ Carnivorous!!]

The physical structure of Man is declared by our most eminent
biologists and anatomists to be that of a _frugivorous_ (fruit-eating)
animal. It is, therefore, our Creator's intention that we should
subsist upon the various fruits of the earth--not upon the products of
the shambles.[1]

[1] See "The Testimony of Science in Favour of Natural and Humane
Diet."

The accepted scientific classification places Man with the anthropoid
apes, at the head of the highest order of mammals. These animals bear
the closest resemblance to human beings, their teeth and internal
organs being practically identical, and in a natural state they
subsist upon nuts, seeds, grains, and other fruits. Hence those who
have studied this subject thoroughly can hardly entertain any doubt
that the more largely our diet consists of these simple products of
nature, the more likely we shall be to enjoy health and to secure
longevity.

The number and variety of such fruits and seeds is very great
(including all the nuts and cereals _and their products_, as well as
the pulses, legumes, etc.); and the Science of Dietetics has made such
rapid progress in recent years that nuts and grains are, for the
benefit of those who possess weakened digestive organs, now prepared
in various ways which make them easily digestible and very savoury
when cooked. To such foods may be added, for the sake of convenience
and variety, vegetables of various kinds and dairy produce, such as
milk, butter, cheese and eggs.

[Sidenote: =Personal Testimony.=]

Nineteen years of abstinence from flesh-food (practised without any
illness, and resulting in increased strength, stamina and health), and
of observation and experiment during that period, combined with the
knowledge obtained through helping hundreds of men and women to regain
health by reforming their habits of living, have convinced me that a
well selected fruitarian dietary, thus supplemented, will prove
beneficial to all who desire physical and mental fitness. Temporary
difficulties may be experienced by some in adopting such a simple
style of living, or in obtaining adequate provision in their present
domestic conditions; mistakes may be made--certain necessary elements
being omitted from the new diet--and temporary failure may sometimes
result in consequence; but if some preliminary study and consideration
are given to the matter, and _variety_ in the food is secured to
ensure complete nourishment, success is easily obtainable.

[Sidenote: =A Step at a Time.=]

In most cases where there is a desire to adopt this purer and better
way, it will be found that the policy of proceeding slowly but surely,
a step at a time, is the wisest in the end.

The first step must be total abstinence from the flesh and blood of
animals, and the substitution of less objectionable food containing an
equal amount of proteid; this will soon lead to a distaste for fowl,
but the use of fish should be retained by those commencing to reform
their ways until some experience has been gained, and any serious
domestic difficulties which may exist have been removed. Then this
partial vegetarian diet can be still further purified, until it is
more entirely "fruitarian" in its nature. Circumstances, and
individual sentiment and taste, must regulate the rate of this
progress towards what may be termed Edenic living; I can but show the
way and give helpful information.

[Sidenote: =Advantages of Fruitarianism.=]

A few of the reasons which lead me to advocate a fruitarian dietary as
the ideal one, are as follows:--

Persons who live chiefly upon fruits of all kinds do not injure
themselves by consuming the poisonous waste-products (uric acid, &c.),
contained in flesh; and they are not often tempted, like those who
partake of very savoury and toothsome dishes, to eat after the needs
of the body are satisfied. They thus escape two of the chief causes of
disease and premature death--_auto-intoxication and excessive eating_.
They also avoid, to a great extent, the temptation to eat when they
are not hungry, and thus they are more likely to obey the dictates of
natural instinct concerning _when to eat_. Even if fruit should be
taken in excessive quantity, very little harm results from such
indiscretion.

Fruitarians thus lessen the amount of work put upon the digestive
organs, and consequently have more energy to expend upon mental or
physical labour. The grape sugar contained in sweet fruits--such as
dates, figs, raisins and bananas--is assimilated almost without effort
and very quickly.

The juices of ripe fruits help to eliminate urates, waste products,
and other harmful deposits from the blood and tissues, as they act as
solvents. Fruit, therefore, tends to prevent ossification of the
arteries, premature old age, gouty and rheumatic disorders, sickness
and untimely death.

Fruitarian diet--if scientifically chosen and containing all the
elements required by the body--prevents the development of the "drink
crave," and it will cure nearly all cases if properly and wisely
adopted. Dipsomania is induced by malnutrition, by eating stimulating
food, such as flesh, or by eating to excess; a fruitarian drunkard has
not yet, so far as I am aware, been discovered in this country.

Pure blood is secured by living upon such food, and consequently there
is little or no tendency to develop _inflammatory_ maladies. The
wounds of Turkish and Egyptian soldiers have been found to heal three
times as quickly as those of shamble-fed Englishmen; the reason is
that they live chiefly upon dates, figs and other fruits, milk and
lentils, etc.; and the same tendency has been observed in the case of
the Japanese wounded. A wonderful immunity from sickness is enjoyed by
those who live in accord with Nature's plan; microbes and disease
germs do not find a congenial environment in their bodies. This I have
proved by nearly twenty years of uninterrupted good health, and
freedom from medical attendance, and my experience is corroborated by
that of a multitude of witnesses in the ranks of the food-reformers.

Fruitarian diet, if complete, tends to lessen irritability, to promote
benevolence and peace of mind, to increase the supremacy of the
'higher self,' to clear and strengthen spiritual perception, and to
lessen domestic care. Those who desire to develop the higher spiritual
powers which are latent in Man, to cultivate the psychic or intuitive
senses, and to win their way to supremacy over their physical
limitations, will find fruitarianism helpful in every respect. Such
have only to _try it_, intelligently, in order to prove that this is
true.

Such a system of living may thus become an important factor in the
great work of uplifting our race from the _animal_ to the _spiritual_
plane; and herein lies the great hope for mankind. The harbingers of
the 'Coming Race'--a more spiritual Race--are already treading this
Earth, known and recognized by those whose eyes have been opened to
the vision of the higher and transcendent life. And that which tends
to accelerate the development of these characteristics is worthy of
our serious consideration and earnest advocacy.

Such a diet does not necessitate the horrible cruelties of the
cattle-boat and the slaughter-house--therefore it must commend itself
to every genuine humanitarian.

It does not contain the germs of disease that are found in the dead
bodies of animals--frequently afflicted with tuberculosis, cancer,
foot-and-mouth-disease, incipient anthrax, swine-fever and parasites
of various kinds.

It is free from that potent cause of physical malady, uric acid--which
is contained in all flesh; and from "ptomaines,"--which develop in
corpses quickly after death and often prove fatal to consumers of
meat. And it will be found, if wisely chosen, to produce a stronger
body, a clearer brain, and a purer mind.

The testimony of thousands of living advocates, both in cold and warm
climates--many of whom are medical men, or athletes who have
accomplished record performances which demanded prolonged endurance
and unusual stamina--bears evidence to this fact; therefore those who
are desirous of commencing this more excellent way of living need not
fear they are making any reckless or dangerous experiment.

The food which our Creator _intended_ us to eat must be the _safest_
and _best_ for us. Man does not resemble, either internally or
externally, any carnivorous animal, and no unprejudiced student of
the subject can well escape the conclusion that when we descend to the
level of the beasts of prey, by eating flesh, we violate a physical
Law of our being, and run the risk of incurring the inevitable
penalties which Nature exacts for such transgressions.

[Illustration]

These penalties are being lavishly dealt out with inexorable
impartiality in the civilized lands of the Western world, where, in
spite of the rapid increase of our medical men, and the 'wonderful
discoveries' of panaceas by the representatives of unscrupulous
pathological search, such maladies as appendicitis, consumption,
cancer, lunacy, gout, neurasthenia and other evidences of physical
deterioration are still prevalent or steadily increasing.

And, although the fact is not so apparent to the superficial observer,
a still heavier penalty in the form of spiritual loss is being
suffered by those who err in this respect, for _carnal food_ produces
_carnal-mindedness_, dims the spiritual vision, chains the soul to the
material plane of thought and consciousness, and makes the supremacy
of the 'spirit' over the 'flesh' well-nigh impossible.

It is natural for every man and woman to live at least a century. The
fact that thousands have done so, proves that the majority might
attain this age if they would cease from transgressing Nature's laws.
Seneca truly said, "Man does not die, he kills himself."

By "eating to live," instead of "living to eat"--introducing into our
bodies pure and vitalizing energy by means of wisely chosen natural
food--and by amending our ways generally in accordance with the
dictates of reason and common sense, we may live to benefit the world
by useful service with our faculties matured and our minds stored by
the teachings of experience. Instead of being in our dotage when we
reach threescore years and ten, we should still be fit to serve our
day and generation.

[Sidenote: =The Highest Motive.=]

Those who decide to adopt this reformed system of diet will be
fortified in their resolve if they are actuated by loyalty to the
Divine Will and regard for Humane Principle, in addition to reasons
which are based merely upon self-interest. The desire to lessen
suffering, and to live in accordance with God's laws, furnishes a
stronger incentive than the wish to escape disease and to secure
longevity.

A philanthropist or humanitarian who embraces the sublime ideal of
helping to lift mankind to a higher plane of experience, to deliver
our degenerate Race from some of the worst evils which afflict us,
and, at the same time, to prevent the infliction of pain and death in
most revolting forms upon countless millions of innocent animals, will
either conquer the initial difficulties which confront those who thus
make practical protest against the flesh traffic, or will cheerfully
endure temporary inconvenience and self-denial "for Righteousness'
sake."

Each new recruit who joins the Food-Reform Movement should therefore
give such preliminary study to the subject as will produce the
unalterable conviction that flesh-eating is an _unnatural_ habit for
Man, that it is totally _unnecessary_, that reliable medical evidence
proves it to be generally _injurious_, and that it involves cruelty
and bloodshed which are barbarous and indefensible, _because quite
needless_.

A deaf ear will then be turned to the warnings of any well-disposed
friends who, being under the spell of ancient fallacies, or ignorant
concerning the nutritive advantages which the fruits of the earth
possess over the products of the shambles, would seek to deter him
from the path of self-reform by prophesying physical shipwreck and
disaster.

Popular illusions concerning the necessity for animal food are rapidly
being swept away, and public opinion has already changed to such an
extent that leaders of thought in every land are now impressed with
the full import and beneficence of this Reformation. And so many
forces are now converging and combining to influence and impel mankind
in this direction, that the 'signs of the times' indicate a rapidly
approaching Era in which Man will return to his original food, and, by
so doing, enter upon a happier and more peaceful period of existence
upon this planet.




=A PLEA FOR THE SIMPLE LIFE.=


Simple meals and simple dishes are easily prepared, they lessen
domestic care, are less likely to cause indigestion, and soon become
appreciated and preferred.

[Illustration]

Few persons realize how little they know the true taste of many
vegetables; the majority having never eaten them _separately_ or
cooked in a proper manner. A cauliflower skilfully served as a
separate course, either "au gratin" or with thin melted butter
slightly flavoured with a few drops of Tarragon vinegar, or with
tomato sauce, has quite a different taste from that which is
experienced when it is mixed up with gravy, meat, potatoes and other
articles or food.

Young green peas, or new potatoes steamed in their skins and dried off
in the oven so as to be "floury," will, if eaten with a little salt
and butter, have a delicacy of flavour which is scarcely noticeable if
they are served with a plate of beef or mutton and other vegetables. A
few chestnuts carefully cooked in a similar manner, make a dish that
an overfed alderman might enjoy; and the same remark will apply to
many simple and easily prepared fruitarian dishes.

It is a mistake to think that this reformed diet necessarily involves
a great amount of cooking, for the reverse is the fact if _simplicity_
is aimed at and its advantages are appreciated. It is well to remember
also that our most enlightened and progressive physicians are now
recommending uncooked foods of all kinds to all who would retain or
regain health.

An excellent lunch can be made with some well chosen cheese and brown
bread and butter, and a delicate lettuce (dressed with pure olive oil,
a small quantity of French wine vinegar, and a pinch of sugar),
followed by fresh and dried fruits such as bananas, almonds, raisins,
figs, etc. Such a repast is inexpensive, nutritious, and easily
digestible. A large variety of foreign and fancy cheeses are now
obtainable, so that even such a simple meal as this can be varied
constantly. The best lettuces are produced by our French neighbours,
but our own market gardeners are beginning to learn that it is easy to
get them tender by growing them under glass.

[Sidenote: =The Simple Breakfast.=]

In most fruitarian households the cooking for breakfast soon becomes
simplified and lessened. Eggs served in different ways on alternate
mornings, fresh and dried fruits, nuts, brown bread, super cooked
cereals such as granose biscuit, butter and preserves, are found to be
quite sufficient as accompaniments to the morning beverage. French
plums, figs and other dried fruits, when carefully stewed in the oven
for some hours, and served with cream, are very nutritious. A small
plate of 'Manhu' wheat, rye, barley, or oat flakes, served with hot
milk or cream, can be added so as to make a more solid meal for
growing children or hard workers. And those who are accustomed to a
more elaborate breakfast, because of the difficulty of obtaining a
mid-day substantial meal, can select one of the items which are
mentioned in the list of recipes under the heading of "Breakfast
Dishes."

[Sidenote: =Avoid Dyspepsia.=]

One reason for urging simplicity is that, owing to prevalent ignorance
concerning food-values, it is more easy for the _inexperienced_
food-reformer to make dietetic mistakes than the flesh-eater.

By partaking freely of stewed acid fruits and vegetables at the same
meal, or by blending a great variety of savouries, vegetables, sweets
and rich fatty dishes together in a ghastly 'pot pourri,' or by eating
to excess of porridge, beans, or fried dishes, many have made serious
blunders. They, for want of proper instruction, have hastily come to
the conclusion that "vegetarian diet does not suit them," and
returning to the flesh-pots, have henceforth denounced the evangel of
dietetic reform, instead of profiting by the useful lesson Nature
tried to teach them.

The wisest plan is to make one's diet generally _as varied as
possible_, but not to mix many articles together _at the same meal_.

Abstainers from flesh should begin to live to some extent (say two
days a week) in picnic style, and the practice will soon become more
habitual. A picnic luncheon which is considered enjoyable in the woods
or on the moors will be found to be just as nice at home if the
articles provided are well chosen and tastefully prepared. Variety can
be obtained by introducing daintily cut sandwiches made with mustard
and cress, tomato paste, potted haricots, or lentils, scrambled eggs,
fancy cheese cut thinly, flaked nuts and honey, etc. Fresh and dried
fruit, nuts, almonds, raisins and sultanas, fruit cakes, and custard
or rice puddings, provide useful additions; and it will soon be found
that the old-fashioned three or four-course meal which involves such
laborious preparation is a needless addition to life's many cares.

[Sidenote: =Necessary Elements in Food.=]

It is important to bear in mind that our daily food must contain a
sufficient quantity of certain necessary elements:

(1) PROTEIN. To be found in nuts and nut foods (such as Protose,
Nuttoria and Fibrose, &c.), eggs, cheese, brown bread, oatmeal,
haricots, lentils and peas.

(2) FAT. To be obtained in nuts, nut-butters, olive oil, cheese, milk,
cream, butter, and oatmeal.

(3) PHOSPHATES AND MINERAL SALTS. Contained in the husk of wheat,
barley, oats, and rye (therefore included in brown bread, granose
biscuits and other whole-wheat or cereal preparations), cheese,
bananas and apples.

(4) SUGAR. To be obtained from all starch foods, but most easily and
in the best and most readily assimilable form from sweet fruits and
honey.




=A PLEA FOR MODERATION.=


[Illustration: Do not dig your grave with your teeth!]

One of the most frequent mistakes made by those who commence to live
upon a fleshless diet is that of eating too much--an error, also
committed by the general public. Often, through ignorance of the fact
that lean beef consists of water to the extent of about 75%, and
through having been brought up under the spell of the popular delusion
that meat is a great source of strength and stamina, they jump to the
conclusion that they must consume large plates of cereals and
vegetables in order to make up for their abstinence from animal food.
They bring upon themselves severe attacks of dyspepsia--either by
eating excessive quantities of starch in the form of porridge, bread
and potatoes, or of such concentrated foods as haricots, lentils or
nuts (being ignorant of the fact that these latter are much more
nutritious than lean beef and that only a very small quantity is
needed for a sufficient meal).[2]

[2] See Table of Food Values on page 45.

Nothing does more injury to the Food-Reform Movement than the
discredit which is brought upon it by those who upset themselves by
over-eating, and who feel led to justify their defection by attacking
the system they have forsaken. Among the numerous cases brought to my
notice, I remember one of a minister's wife, who by partaking of seven
meals a day, and finishing up at ten o'clock in the evening with
cocoa, cheese and porridge, brought herself to such a state of nervous
prostration that her local doctor ordered her to return to a flesh
diet, "as she required _nourishment_." He thus diagnosed her
condition, instead of attributing it to preposterous over-feeding.

A Golden Rule for every food-reformer is this--_Eat only when you are
hungry_, and never to repletion. An exception must be made, however,
in certain cases of anæmic and delicate persons. When there is not
sufficient vitality to cause appetite, or to digest food normally, it
is often necessary to insist on regular meals being taken,
notwithstanding the patient's distaste for food. Drowsiness and stupor
after a meal are sure signs of excess, and I cannot too strongly urge
temperance in diet. During my long experience of philanthropic work as
an advocate of natural and hygienic living, I have only heard of a few
cases of persons suffering any ill effects from eating too little,
whereas cases of the opposite sort have been rather numerous.
Ninety-nine per cent. of the centenarians of the world have been
characterized by _abstemiousness_; however much their ways and customs
may have otherwise differed, in this one respect they are practically
alike--declaring that they have always been small eaters, and
believers in moderation in all things.




=ARTISTIC COOKERY.=


In every household where reformed diet is adopted, effort should be
made to prepare the meals in an artistic manner. If a dish is
skilfully cooked and tastefully served it is not only more enjoyable
but more easily digested.

[Illustration]

The general custom in English homes is to serve vegetables in a rather
slovenly style. To see how nicely such things as legumes, vegetables,
salads and fruits can be prepared, one requires to go to a good French
or Italian restaurant. But it is quite easy for us to learn the ways
of our friends abroad, and to make our dishes look tempting and
appetising.

One of the first lessons to be learned by the vegetarian cook is how
to fry rissoles, potatoes, etc., _quite crisp_, and free from any
flavour of oil or fat. To do this a wire basket which will fit loosely
into a stewpan is necessary, and it can be purchased at any good
ironmonger's shop. Nutter (refined coconut butter) is a well prepared
form of vegetable fat, and it is retailed at a moderate price; it
keeps for a long period and is equally useful for making
pastry--three quarters of a pound being equal to one pound of butter.
Where nut-butters cannot be obtained, good olive oil should be used.

The temperature of the fat or oil must be past boiling point, and
should reach about 380 degrees. When it is hot enough it will quickly
turn a small piece of white bread quite brown, if a finger of it is
dipped in the fat. Unless this temperature is reached the articles to
be fried may turn out greasy and unbearable. If the fat is heated very
much beyond 400 degrees it may take fire. Haricots, lentils, and many
other legumes are more tasty if made into cutlets or rissoles and
fried in this manner, after being mixed with breadcrumbs and
seasoning, than if merely boiled or stewed in the usual crude style.

[Sidenote: =The Art of Flavouring.=]

The art of flavouring is also one which should be studied by every
housewife. By making tasty gravies and sauces many a dish which would
otherwise be insipid can be rendered attractive. The recipes for
"Gravies" will prove useful on this point.

Many valuable modern scientific food products are not fully
appreciated because people do not know how to serve them. Take
'Protose,' 'Nuttoria' and 'Nuttose' for instance--very useful
substitutes for flesh which are made from nuts (malted and therefore
half digested). If _slightly_ stewed, and eaten without any
flavouring, some persons dislike the distinctive taste; if, however,
they are well cooked, according to the recipes printed later on in
this book, and served with such garnishings as are recommended, they
are usually much enjoyed, even by those who are prejudiced against all
vegetarian ideas.

[Sidenote: =Cooking by Gas saves Labour.=]

Cooking by gas appliances is more easily controlled and regulated than
when the old-fashioned fire is employed, and much labour for stoking
and cleaning is avoided. Those who can do so, should obtain a gas
hot-plate, consisting of two or three spiral burners, and a
moderate-sized gas oven. If they cannot afford the ordinary gas
cooking oven, a smaller substitute can be obtained, which can be
placed upon any gas jet; this is very economical for cooking single
dishes, and for warming plates, etc. A gas cooking jet can be obtained
for eighteenpence, and two or three of these will take the place of a
hot-plate if economy is necessary. In summer-time the kitchen range is
quite a superfluity unless it is required for heating bath water.

[Sidenote: =A New Mission for Women.=]

The ordinary public know very little of the variety and delicacy of a
well chosen fruitarian dietary when thoughtfully prepared; ignorance
and prejudice consequently cause thousands to turn a deaf ear to the
evangel of Food-Reform. All women who desire to bring about the
abolition of Butchery, and to hasten the Humane Era, should therefore
educate themselves in artistic fruitarian cookery, and then help to
instruct others.

To illustrate the truth of these remarks I may mention that at a
banquet given by the Arcadian Lodge of Freemasons, at the Hotel Cecil,
in London--the first Masonic Lodge which passed a resolution to banish
animal-flesh from all its banquets--one of the Chief Officers of the
Grand Lodge of England attended. He came filled with prejudice against
the innovation and prepared to criticise the repast most unfavourably.
In his after-dinner speech, however, he admitted that it was one of
the best Masonic banquets he had ever attended, and said that if what
if he had enjoyed was "vegetarian diet," he was prepared to adopt it
if he found it possible to get it provided at home.

By practising the recipes which are given in the following pages, and
by utilizing the hints which accompany them, readers of this book will
find no difficulty in acquiring the skill which is requisite to win
many from the flesh-pots, even when they cannot be induced to abandon
them from any higher motives than self-interest or gustatory
enjoyment.

Every woman should resolve to learn how to feed her children with pure
and harmless food. Every mother should make her daughters study this
art and thus educate them to worthily fulfil their domestic
responsibilities. Here is a new profession for women--for teachers of
high-class fruitarian and hygienic cookery will soon be greatly in
demand.




=WHAT TO DO WHEN TRAVELLING.=


The difficulty of being properly catered for when staying at Hotels
was formerly a very real one, but owing to the enlightenment
concerning diet which is now taking place, and the rapid increase of
foreign restaurants and cafés in English-speaking countries it is
becoming lessened every day. The great variety of fleshless dishes now
supplied in nearly all light-refreshment restaurants, in response to
the public demand, is compelling even the largest Hotels to modify
their cuisine accordingly.

[Illustration]

For breakfast it is sometimes a good plan to order what one wants the
previous night, if any specially cooked dishes are required, but it is
_not_ advisable to inform the waiter that one is a vegetarian. It is
generally possible to obtain porridge, grilled tomatoes on toast,
poached or fried eggs, stewed mushrooms, etc., without giving extra
trouble or exciting comment. Where these cannot be obtained, a plain
breakfast of brown bread or toast and butter, with eggs, preserves and
fruit should be taken.

At large hotels in our chief cities a Restaurant and a Grill Room are
provided. The food-reformer should go to one of these for his dinner,
rather than to the dining room, as he will then be able to obtain
various simple _à la carte_ dishes. One 'portion' of any particular
dish will often suffice for two persons, thus enabling those whose
means are limited to obtain greater variety without increasing
expenditure. Care has to be exercised, however, concerning certain
dishes; for instance, if macaroni is required, it is well to ask the
waiter to request the cook not to introduce any chopped ham. He should
be told that you wish macaroni served with tomato sauce and cheese
only, in the "Neapolitan" style.

In most Continental Hotels and Restaurants the simplest, cheapest, and
best plan is to take 'table d'hôte'--telling the head waiter well
beforehand that the lunch or dinner is required 'maigre' (that is
without flesh, just as it is usually served during Lent). A varied,
well selected, and ample repast will then be supplied at a moderate
cost. The same plan is best in 'Pensions.'

The general rule to be adopted in small British hotels is to think
beforehand what dishes the cook is in the habit of making which are
free from flesh; these should be ordered in preference to those which
are strange and not likely to be understood. At the same time it is
well to insist upon being supplied with anything which it is
reasonable to expect the proprietor to furnish, because such action
tends to improve the catering of the hotels of the country, to make it
easier for other food-reformers, and to sweep away the difficulty
which at present exists in some towns, of obtaining anything fit to
eat in the orthodox hotel coffee rooms, except beasts, birds, or
fishes.

[Sidenote: =Railway Journeys.=]

Those who are making railway journeys can easily provide themselves
with a simple luncheon basket containing fruits, sandwiches made with
flaked nuts, eggs, cheese or preserves, or with such delicacies as
haricot or lentil potted meat (directions for making which will be
found later on, in the section devoted to Luncheon Recipes.)
Travellers may perhaps be reminded that cheese and nuts contain much
more nutriment than lean meat.

Food-reformers who are about to pay a prolonged visit in a private
house should inform the hostess, when accepting her invitation, that
they are abstainers from flesh, but that their tastes are very simple
and that they enjoy anything except flesh-food. As she might have
erroneous ideas about the requirements of vegetarians she might
otherwise feel perplexed as to what to provide. If the visitor takes
fish the fact should be stated.

[Sidenote: =No Faddism.=]

Care should be taken not to involve the hostess in any needless
trouble, and she should be shown, by the simplicity of one's
requirements, that she is easily capable of affording complete
satisfaction. When she realizes this, she will probably take pleasure
in learning something about hygienic living, and will be ready to read
a pamphlet or a guide-book upon the subject, and to produce some of
the dishes contained in it.

The Humane Diet Cause has been much hindered by the 'fads' of persons
who have adopted very extreme views about diet and who worry
themselves and other people about trifling matters in connection with
their food until they are almost regarded as being pests in a
household. Instead of cheerfully partaking of anything that is
provided, except flesh, they parade their scruples about almost
everything on the table, and, consequently, those who entertain them
vow that they will never become such nuisances themselves or entertain
such again.

I have always found that by letting my friends clearly understand that
I abstain from butchered flesh chiefly because of _humane reasons_ and
for the sake of _principle_, they respect my sentiment, and evince a
desire to discuss the matter without prejudice. If fruitarianism is
adopted merely as a 'fad,' discordant vibrations are often aroused
because one's acquaintances consider that one is giving needless
trouble by being unconventional without sufficient justification.

[Sidenote: =Sea Voyages.=]

Those who are making a sea voyage will find that many of the large
steamship companies are quite prepared to furnish substitutes for
flesh-diet if an arrangement is made beforehand. In such cases there
should be a clear stipulation that brown bread, dried and fresh fruit,
nuts, farinaceous puddings, omelets, or dishes made with cheese,
macaroni, lentils, haricots, tomatoes, etc., should be obtainable in
some form and in sufficient variety. A list of a few 'specialities'
(such as Protose, Nuttoria, &c.) should be furnished when a long
voyage is contemplated, so that the steward may stock them.




=ADVICE FOR BEGINNERS.=


The following suggestions will prove helpful to those who are desirous
of adopting the reformed dietary:--

1. Give up flesh meat _at once_ and _entirely_--replacing it by dishes
made with eggs, cheese, macaroni, peas, lentils, nuts, and nut-meats.
Later on you will be able to do without fish also, but it is best to
proceed slowly and surely.

[Illustration]

2. Eat _less_ rather than _more_. Fruitarian foods such as the above
are more nourishing than butcher's meat.

3. Try to like _simple_ foods, instead of elaborate dishes that
require much preparation. Avoid 'frying-panitis.'

4. Eat dry foods rather than sloppy ones; they are more easily
digested. Take toast or Granose biscuits with porridge to assist
proper salivation. If porridge causes trouble, use wheat or rye flakes
(Manhu or Kellogg brands), with hot milk or cream, instead.

5. Do not mix stewed acid fruits with vegetables and legumes; take the
former with cereals, cheese, or eggs. Green vegetables should be taken
very sparingly, and with savoury dishes alone. If eaten with sweets
they are apt to disagree.

6. Persons of sedentary habits should let at least one meal a day
consist of uncooked fruit only--or of fruit with brown bread and
butter--the bread being _well baked_.

7. Dried fruits, such as figs, dates, prunes, raisins, sultanas, etc.,
are very easily digested; and if blended with nuts or almonds they
make a perfect meal. Such fruits may be taken freely and with
advantage by almost everyone.

8. Nuts should be flaked in a nut-mill to aid digestion; cheese can
also be made more easily assimilable in this way (or by cooking). Many
nut products are now sold which are malted and partially pre-digested.

9. Give a few hours' thought and study to the important subject of
your diet; learn what to do, and what newly-invented scientific foods
are obtainable.

10. Do not make the mistake of attempting to live on potatoes, white
bread, cabbages, etc., or merely upon the ordinary conventional
dietary with the meat left out. Obtain and use well made and well
cooked wholemeal bread every day. Take sufficient _proteid_, 1-1/2 to
2-ozs. per day, to avoid anæmia--indigestion often results from _lack
of vitality_ caused through chronic semi-starvation.

11. If you feel any symptoms of dyspepsia, and can trace it to
_excess_ in eating, or to dietetic errors, reduce your food, fast
temporarily, and take more exercise. Consider what mistakes you have
made, and avoid them in the future. Eat only when hungry, in such
cases.

12. If you are not getting on, obtain advice from a Doctor who is a
_fruitarian_ or from an experienced Food-reformer.




=Commercial Dietetic Inventions.=


A large number of special proprietary substitutes for animal food can
now be obtained to supplement the ordinary ones provided in the
household. The latest particulars concerning these can always be known
by reference to the advertisement pages of _The Herald of the Golden
Age_, and full information as to their use is supplied by the various
manufacturers. But although they are _useful_ and _convenient_ in many
households, they are not _absolutely essential_. 'Home-made' dishes
are often the best, being most economical, therefore it is advisable
that all food-reformers should learn how to make nut-meats, &c., at
home. Some of these substitutes are as follows:--

=For Meat-Extracts=: Marmite, Vegeton, Carnos, Nutril, Mapleton's
Gravy Essence, Cayler's Extract, Wintox.

=For Joints of Meat=: Protose, Nuttose, Savrose, Fibrose, F.R.
Nut-Meat, Vejola, Nuttoria, Shearn's Nut-Meat, Nutton, Brazose,
Nuto-Cream Meat, Mapleton's Frittamix.

=For Cold Meats=: "Pitman" Nut-Meat Brawn, Ellis's Tomato and Nut
Paste, Pasta-sol, Lentose, Nuska Viando, Savoury Paste, Potted Beans
and Lentils.

=For Meat Fat=: Nutter Suet, Vegsu, Nutter, Nucoline, and Nut
Margarine.

Pine Kernels, which contain 10 ozs. of oil to the pound, and which
when rolled and chopped exactly resemble suet, are also an excellent
substitute.

Delicious Nut-Butters are also now obtainable for high-class
cookery--such as Almond, Walnut, Cashew, and Table Nutter. Although
superior, these are as cheap as ordinary cooking butters.

=For Lard and Dripping=: Nutter, Darlene, Albene, Nut-oil, "Pitman"
Vegetable Lard.

=For Meat proteid=: Emprote, Hygiama, Horlick's Malted Milk, Casumen
Dried Milk, Gluten Meal.

=For Gelatin=: Agar-Agar, or Cayler's Jellies.

=For Animal Soups=: Mapleton's Nut and proteid Soups, and "Pitman"
Vegsal Soups.

=Prepared Breakfast Cereals=: Manhu flaked Wheat, Rye, Barley and
Oats, Kellogg Wheat and Corn Flakes, Granose Flakes and Biscuits,
Shredded Wheat, Archeva Rusks, Puffed Wheat, Power, Kornules, Toasted
Wheat Flakes, Melarvi Crisps and Biscuits.

=For Picnic Hampers=: Savage's Nut Foods or Cream o' Nuts, Wallace
Cakes and Scones, Mapleton's Nut Meats, Winter's Nut Cream Rolls,
"Pitman" Fruit and Nut Cakes and Nut Meat Brawn, Wallace P. R. or Ixion
or Artox or "Pitman" Biscuits.

=Meat Stock= is substituted by vegetable stock, produced by stewing
haricots, peas, lentils, etc. The latter is far more nutritious, and
is free from the uric acid and excrementitious matter that are present
in meat decoctions. A tasty and meaty flavour can be at once given to
soups or gravies by adding some vegetable meat-extract selected from
one of the varieties already mentioned.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the following pages recipes will be found for preparing dishes
which closely resemble, in taste, appearance, and nutritive value,
those to which the community have been accustomed, some of them being
of such a nature that persons who are fond of flesh-food find it
difficult to detect whether they are eating such or not.




=RELATIVE VALUES OF FOODS.=


=How to Regulate our Diet.=

Our food must contain certain elements, and in proper quantity, if the
body is to be well sustained, renewed and nourished. These are mainly
as follows:

    1. Protein to form flesh, build muscle, and produce strength.

    2. Fat and Carbohydrates, to provide heat and energy.

    3. Salts and minerals (such as phosphates, lime, iron, citrates,
    etc.) to build bones and teeth, feed the brain and nerves, and
    purify the body.

No hard-and-fast table or rule can be laid down concerning the proper
proportions in which these elements should be combined, because the
amount needful for each individual varies according to his size, the
sort of work he does, the amount of physical or mental energy he puts
forth, and the temperature of the atmosphere surrounding him.

Until Professor Chittenden made his extensive and conclusive series of
experiments in America, in 1903-4, to determine the real amount of
Protein and other elements required to keep the body in perfect
health, the average estimate for a person of average size, who does a
moderate amount of physical labour, was about 4-ozs. of Protein per
day.

But these official experiments, conducted with scientific precision,
extending over a long period, and made with thirty-four typical and
carefully graded representatives of physical and mental work,
demonstrated that half this amount of Protein is sufficient, and that
strength and health are increased when the quantity is thus reduced;
also that a smaller amount of Carbohydrate food (bread, etc.), than
was previously thought necessary, is enough.

One may therefore now safely reckon that men of average size and
weight (say 10 to 12 stone) doing a moderate amount of physical and
mental work, can thrive under ordinary circumstances on a daily ration
containing about 800 grains of Protein (nearly 2 ozs).

The following food chart will enable the reader to calculate
(approximately) how much food of any particular kind is necessary to
provide the above amount. Adult persons below the average size and
weight, and living sedentary rather than an active physical life, will
naturally require less than this normal standard. The relative cost
and economy of the different foods can also thus be ascertained.

If care is taken to secure a sufficient quantity of Protein the
requisite amount of Carbohydrates is not likely to be omitted, and
hunger will prove a reliable guide in most cases. It is advisable,
however, to see that enough Fat is taken, especially in winter, and by
persons lacking in nerve force.

The table of food-values will easily enable the reader to ascertain
the proportion of Fat in each kind of food.

The following indications of dietetic error may prove useful:--

[Sidenote: =Signs of Dietetic Mistakes.=]

Excess of proteid matter causes a general sense of plethora and
unbearableness, nervous prostration or drowsiness after meals, a
tendency to congestion (often resulting in piles, etc.), headache,
irritability, and bad temper. A continuous deficiency of it would tend
to produce general weakness and anæmia.

Excess of carbohydrate matter (starch), especially if not sufficiently
cooked and not well masticated, produces dyspepsia, flatulence, pain
in the chest and abdomen, acidity (resulting in pimples and boils),
and an inflammatory state of the system. Deficiency of it (or its
equivalent, grape sugar) would produce lack of force and physical
exhaustion.

Excess of fat tends to cause biliousness. Deficiency of it results in
nervous weakness, neuralgia, and low temperature of the body.

[Sidenote: =Food for Brain Workers.=]

It is important to remember that the more _physical_ energy we put
forth, the larger is the amount of proteid we require in our diet--and
vice versa. Brain workers of sedentary habits require but little
proteid, and quickly suffer from indigestion if this is taken too
freely. For such, a very simple diet consisting largely of dried
and fresh fruits, nuts (flaked or ground), milk, eggs and cheese, and
_super-cooked_ cereals (such as wholemeal biscuits, and toast,
Granose and Kellogg flakes, and well baked rice dishes) will be found
to be the most suitable.

In order to supply the brain with phosphates it is very important that
mental workers should take whole wheat bread instead of the
emasculated white substitute which is provided almost everywhere. It
is the outer part of the grain that provides brain-food (combined with
an _easily assimilable_ form of protein), and many of our urban bread
winners break down because they are deprived of the essential food
elements therein contained. To take 'standard' bread does not meet the
case, and every food-reformer who wants to keep really fit should
demand and obtain well baked and unadulterated wholemeal bread. I feel
convinced that if every growing child and every mental toiler could
always be supplied with bread of this type, the deterioration of our
British race would soon be arrested and we should witness signs of
physical regeneration. 'Artox' and 'Ixion' brands of pure whole
wheatmeal are the most perfect I know of at the present time, and
delicious bread can easily be made from them if the recipe printed on
page 114 is followed.

=FOOD CHART.=

    =Showing how to obtain sufficient (1) Protein--for body building.
    (2) Carbohydrates and Fat--for providing heat and energy.=

_A man of average size and weight (10 to 12 stone) doing a moderate
amount of physical labour requires about 800 grains of Protein per day
(nearly 2 ozs.). Women and sedentary workers require about 1-1/2 ozs.
(655 grains), and hard physical labourers about 1000 grains._

 ------------------------------+--------+---------+-------------+-----------
                               |        |         | Grains of   |
                               |Amount. |Grains of|Carbohydrates|Approximate
                               |        |Protein. | and Fat.    |   Cost.
 ------------------------------+--------+---------+--------------+-----+-----
                               |        |         |             |  s. |  d.
 Protose (Nut meat)            | 8 ozs. |   889   |    593      |     |  6
 Fibrose (Nut meat)            |12 ozs. |   767   |   4015      |     |  9
 Granose (Wheat)               |13 ozs. |   795   |   4424      |     |  9
 Emprote (Eustace Miles        |        |         |             |     |
     Proteid Food)             | 6 ozs. |   918   |   1320      |     |  7
 Nuto-Cream                    |10 ozs. |   870   |   3145      |     |  8
 Manhu Flaked Wheat            |13 ozs. |   722   |   3935      |     |  3
 Horlick's Malted Milk         | 7 ozs. |   797   |   2548      |  1  |  6
 Almonds                       | 8 ozs. |   805   |   2100      |     | 10
 Chestnuts                     |13 ozs. |   830   |   3700      |     |  3
 Lentils                       | 8 ozs. |   900   |   1915      |     |  1-1/2
 Peas                          | 8 ozs. |   830   |   2100      |     |  1-1/2
 Haricots                      | 8 ozs. |   900   |   2030      |     |  2
 Oatmeal                       |12 ozs. |   813   |   3670      |     |  2
 Cheese (Cheddar)              | 6 ozs. |   745   |    823      |     |  3
   "    (Gruyère)              | 6 ozs. |   835   |    730      |     |  4
   "    (Parmesan)             | 4 ozs. |   770   |    262      |     |  3
   "    (Dutch)                | 5 ozs. |   840   |    450      |     |  3
 Bread (Artox Wholemeal)       |24 ozs. |   788   |   4524      |     |  3
 Rice (once milled)            |14 ozs. |   810   |   2500      |     |  3
 Eggs                          |   7    |   856   |    640      |     |  7
 Figs or Dates                 | 2 lbs. |   850   |   9100      |     | 10
 Milk                          | 3 pts. |   859   |   1927      |     |  6
 Milk (Skimmed)                | 3 pts. |   800   |    742      |     |  3
                               |        |         |             |     |
 =For Comparison:-=            |        |         |             |     |
 Lean Beef                     |10 ozs. |   846   |     151     |     |  9
 Mutton                        |13 ozs. |   822   |    1107     |     | 10
 Chicken                       | 9 ozs. |   850   |     185     |  1  |  9
 Fish (Sole)                   |16 ozs. |   824   |             |  1  |  3
  " (Salmon)                   |12 ozs. |   840   |     274     |  1  |  6




=TABLE OF FOOD VALUES.=

    =Compiled from such authorities as Church, Payer, Letheby, Blyth,
    Hemmeter, Pavy, Holbrook, Oldfield, Miles, and Broadbent, etc.=

 --------------------------------+----------------------------------------------
                                 |                  PERCENTAGE OF
                                 +------+--------+------+--------+--------+-----
                                 |      |        |      |Starch  |Mineral |Total
                                 |Water.|Protein.| Fat. |Matter  |Matter. |Nutri-
                                 |      |        |      |or Sugar|        | ment.
 --------------------------------+------+--------+------+--------+--------+-----
                                 |      |        |      |        |        |
               Lean Beef         | 72.0 |  19.3  |  3.6 |        |   5.1  | 28.0
               Veal              | 71.0 |  17.0  | 11.0 |        |   1.0  | 29.0
               Mutton            |      |        |      |        |        |
                 (Medium Fat)    | 65.2 |  14.5  | 19.5 |        |   0.8  | 34.8
 FLESH-FOODS.  Fat Pork          | 39.0 |   9.8  | 48.9 |        |   2.3  | 61.0
               Chicken (flesh)   | 72.4 |  21.6  |  4.7 |        |   1.3  | 27.6
               Fish (Sole)       | 86.1 |  11.9  |  0.2 |        |   1.2  | 13.3
               Salmon            | 77.0 |  16.1  |  5.3 |        |   1.5  | 23.0
                                 |      |        |      |        |        |
               Eggs              | 64.0 |  14.0  | 10.5 |        |   1.5  | 26.0
 EGGS.         White of Egg      | 78.0 |  12.4  |      |        |   1.6  | 14.0
               Yolk of Egg       | 52.0 |  16.0  | 30.7 |        |   1.3  | 48.0
                                 |      |        |      |        |        |
               Milk (Cow's)      | 86.0 |   4.1  |  3.9 |  5.2   |   0.8  | 14.0
 MILK          Cheese: Cheddar   | 36.0 |  28.4  | 31.1 |        |   4.5  | 64.0
 AND MILK              Stilton   | 32.0 |  26.2  | 37.8 |        |   4.0  | 67.0
 PRODUCTS.             Gruyère   | 40.0 |  31.5  | 24.0 |        |   3.0  | 58.5
                       Dutch     | 36.10|  29.43 | 27.54|        |        | 56.97
                       Parmesan  | 27.56|  44.08 | 15.95|        |  5.72  | 65.75
               Butter            | 12.6 |        | 86.4 |        |   0.8  | 87.2
                                 |      |        |      |        |        |
               Wheatmeal (Artox) | 13.13|  12.84 |  2.30| 68.0   |   1.33 | 84.47
               Oatmeal           | 10.4 |  15.6  |  6.11| 63.6   |   3.0  | 89.1
 CEREALS AND   Barley Meal       | 14.6 |   6.7  |  1.3 | 75.5   |   1.1  | 84.6
 FARINACEOUS   Bran              | 12.5 |  16.4  |  3.5 | 43.6   |   6.0  | 69.5
 FOODS.        Rice (once milled)| 10.4 |  11.4  |  0.4 | 79.0   |   0.4  | 91.2
               Macaroni (Best)   | 10.8 |  11.7  |  1.6 | 72.9   |   3.0  | 89.2
               Sago, Tapioca and |      |        |      |        |        |
                 Arrowroot       | 14.0 |   1.6  |  0.6 | 83.0   |   0.4  | 85.6
                                 |      |        |      |        |        |
               Wholemeal Bread   |      |        |      |        |        |
 BREAD           (Artox)         | 46.0 |   7.5  |  1.4 | 42.0   |   1.3  | 52.2
 FOODS.        White Bread       | 40.0 |   3.5  |  1.0 | 51.2   |   1.0  | 56.5
               Granose Biscuits  |  3.1 |  14.2  |  1.7 | 77.5   |   1.9  | 95.3
                                 |      |        |      |        |        |
               Haricots (White)  |  9.9 |  25.5  |  2.8 | 55.7   |   3.2  | 87.2
               Lentils, Egyptian | 12.3 |  25.9  |  1.9 | 53.0   |   3.0  | 83.0
 LEGUMES.      Peas (Dried)      |  8.3 |  23.8  |  2.1 | 58.7   |   2.1  | 86.7
               Peas (Green)      | 81.8 |   3.4  |  0.4 | 13.7   |   0.7  | 18.2
               Pea Nuts          |  6.5 |  28.3  | 46.2 |  1.8   |   3.3  | 79.6
                                 |      |        |      |        |        |
               Chestnuts         |  7.3 |  14.6  |  2.4 | 69.0   |   3.3  | 89.3
               Walnuts           |  7.2 |  15.8  | 57.4 | 13.0   |   2.0  | 88.2
               Filberts          | 38.0 |  18.4  | 28.5 | 11.1   |   1.5  | 59.5
 NUTS.         Brazil Nuts       |  6.0 |  16.4  | 64.7 |  6.6   |   3.3  | 91.0
               Cocoanuts         | 46.6 |   5.5  | 36.0 |  8.1   |   1.0  | 50.5
               Pine Kernels      |  5.0 |   9.2  | 70.5 | 14.0   |   0.3  | 94.0
               Almonds           |  6.2 |  23.5  | 53.0 |  7.8   |   3.0  | 87.3
                                 |      |        |      |        |        |
               Bananas           | 74.1 |   1.9  |  0.8 | 22.9   |   1.0  | 26.6
 FRESH         Apples            | 84.8 |   0.4  |  0.5 | 12.0   |   0.5  | 13.4
 FRUITS        Grapes            | 78.2 |   1.3  |  1.7 | 14.7   |   0.5  | 18.2
               Strawberries      | 87.6 |   1.1  |  0.7 |  6.8   |   0.6  |  9.2
                                 |      |        |      |        |        |
               Raisins           | 14.0 |   2.5  |  4.7 | 64.7   |   4.1  | 76.0
 DRIED         Figs              | 17.5 |   6.1  |  0.9 | 65.9   |   2.3  | 75.2
 FRUITS.       French Plums      | 26.4 |   2.4  |  0.8 | 65.5   |   1.7  | 70.4
               Dates             | 20.8 |   6.6  |  0.2 | 65.3   |   1.6  | 73.7
                                 |      |        |      |        |        |
               Carrots           | 86.5 |   1.2  |  0.3 |  9.2   |   0.9  | 11.6
               Turnips           | 90.3 |   0.9  | 0.15 |  5.0   |   0.8  | 6.85
               Cauliflower (Head)| 90.8 |   2.2  |  0.4 |  4.7   |   0.8  |  8.1
               Potatoes          | 75.0 |   2.2  |  0.2 | 21.0   |   1.0  | 24.4
               Mushrooms         | 90.3 |   4.3  |  0.3 |  3.7   |   1.4  |  9.7
 VEGETABLES.   Tomatoes          | 91.9 |   1.3  |  0.2 |  5.0   |   0.7  |  7.2
               Asparagus         | 93.7 |   1.8  |      |  0.7   |   0.5  |  3.0
               Beet              | 87.5 |   1.3  |      |  9.0   |   1.1  | 11.4
               Parsnip           | 82.0 |   1.2  |      |  0.6   |   7.2  |  9.0
               Spinach           | 88.5 |   3.5  |      |  4.4   |   2.0  |  9.9
               Cabbage           | 90.0 |   1.9  |      |  2.5   |   1.2  |  5.6




=VEGETARIAN SOUPS.=


=VEGETABLE STOCK.=

The best stock for vegetable soups is made from haricot beans. Take a
pound of these, pick and wash well, and soak for 10 or 12 hours in
cold water. Put them in a saucepan with the water in which they were
soaked, add a few of the coarser stalks of celery, 1 or 2 chopped
Spanish onions, a blade of mace, and a few white peppercorns. If
celery is not in season, use celery salt. Bring to a boil, skim, and
cook gently for at least 2 hours. Then strain, and use as required.


=1. Artichoke Soup.=

Take 2-lbs. of white artichokes, 3-pts. of water, 3 large onions, a
piece of celery (or some celery salt), 1/4-pt. of raw cream or 1-pt. of
milk. Boil together for 45 minutes, strain through a fine sieve and
serve. If cream is used it should not be added until after the soup is
cooked.


=2. Chestnut Soup.=

Take 1-lb. chestnuts, 1 or 2 onions, 1-1/2-pints vegetable stock, 1-oz.
nut-butter.

Boil the chestnuts for 15 minutes and peel them; put these with the
onions (sliced) into a roomy stewpan, with the butter, and fry briskly
for 5 minutes; now add the stock, with seasoning to taste, and bring
to the boil. Simmer gently until onions and chestnuts are quite soft,
and pass all through a hair sieve. Dilute with milk until the
consistency of thin cream, and serve with _croûtons_.


=3. Rich Gravy Soup.=

To 3-pts. of haricot stock add 1 onion and 1 carrot (fried with butter
until brown), 1 stick of celery, 2 turnips and 6 peppercorns, and
thicken with cornflour. Boil all together for 1 hour, strain, return
to saucepan, and add 3 small teaspoons of Marmite. Warm it up, but
_not to boiling point_. Serve with fried bread dice. This soup, if
well made, is equal to anything that a French chef can produce.


=4. Mock Turtle Soup.=

Fry 6 good-sized onions in 1-oz. of butter till nicely browned, then
add 2 breakfastcups of German lentils, a good handful of spinach
leaves, a few capers, about 6 chillies, and 3 pints of water. Let this
simmer for 2 or 3 hours, then strain off, add 2 tablespoons of tapioca
which has been soaked for an hour or two. Boil till perfectly clear.
When ready for serving add salt to taste and 1 teaspoonful of Nutril.
Some small custard quenelles should be put in the tureen--made by
beating 1 egg in 2-ozs. flour and adding 1/4-pt. milk. Bake until firm
and cut into dice.


=5. Brown Haricot Soup.=

Boil 1/2-lb. beans in 2-qts. of water. When the beans crack, add a few
tomatoes, 1 leek sliced, or a Spanish onion, and a bunch of herbs.
Boil until the vegetables are tender, adding a little more water if
necessary. Rub all through a sieve, and return to pan, adding
seasoning, a good lump of butter, and the juice of half a small lemon
after the soup has boiled. If a richer soup is required add two
teaspoonfuls of Nuto-Cream or Marmite just before serving.


=6. Tomato Soup.=

Take a pound of tomatoes, a sliced onion, and 2-ozs. of tapioca
(previously soaked for some hours). Boil for an hour, then add salt,
pepper, and a little butter. Mix 1/2-pt. of milk with a teaspoonful of
flour; add this to the soup, stir and boil for 5 minutes.


=7. Egyptian Lentil Soup.=

Wash and pick 1/2-lb. Egyptian lentils and put on to boil in about 1-qt.
of water. Add 1 sliced onion, 1 carrot, 1 turnip, a small bunch of
herbs, and celery salt, and boil gently about 1 hour. Rub through a
sieve, return to pan, add 1-oz. butter and a cupful of milk. Bring to
boil and serve.


=8. Brazil Nut Soup.=

Pass 1 pint of shelled Brazil nuts through a nut mill, fry these with
one or two chopped onions in 1-oz. of nut-butter, keeping them a pale
yellow colour; add 1-oz. flour, and gradually 1-1/2-pts. of white stock;
bring slowly to the boil and simmer gently until the onions are soft.
Pass through a hair sieve, and dilute with milk.


=9. Julienne Soup.=

Cut some carrots, turnips, onions, celery, and leeks into thin strips,
using double quantity of carrots and turnips. Dry them and then fry
slowly in 2-ozs. of butter until brown. Add 2-qts. of clear vegetable
stock and simmer until tender. Season with salt and a teaspoonful of
castor sugar. Chop some chervil or parsley finely, add and serve. The
addition of some green peas is an improvement--and also quenelles (see
4).


=10. Green Lentil Soup.=

Fry 5 onions in a large saucepan until brown. Add 3/4-lb. of green
lentils, 1-qt. water, and 2 sticks of celery. Stew for 2 hours, and
pass through a strainer. Add 1/4-lb. of cream and 1/2-pt. of milk, bring
to the boil, flavour with salt, and serve.


=11. White Soubise Soup.=

(A French Recipe).

Take 2-ozs. butter, 4 good-sized onions, about 1-pt. cauliflower
water, and 1-pt. of milk, sufficient bread (no crust) to very nearly
absorb the liquor. Cut up the onions, put into the saucepan with the
butter, and cook slowly till tender--it must not be brown. Now add the
bread, the cauliflower water, and half the milk, and boil slowly for
an hour. Take it off the fire, pass it through a sieve, add the rest
of the milk, and heat it again, taking care it does not actually boil,
as it may curdle. Serve.


=12. Green Pea Soup.=

One quart shelled peas; 3 pints water; 1 quart milk; 1 onion; 2
tablespoonfuls butter; 1 tablespoonful flour. Salt and pepper to
taste.

Put the peas in a stewpan with the boiling water and onion and cook
until tender (about half an hour). Pour off water, saving for use
later. Mash peas fine, add water in which they were boiled, and rub
through _purée_ sieve. Return to saucepan, add flour and butter,
beaten together, and the salt and pepper. Gradually add milk, which
must be boiling hot. Beat well and cook 10 minutes, stirring
frequently. This recipe is useful when green peas are getting old and
are not tender enough to be enjoyable if served in the usual way.


=13. White Haricot Soup.=

Stew 1/2-lb. of beans in 2-qts. of water, adding 5 chopped onions, some
chopped celery and a carrot which have been fried in some butter until
well cooked; stew until the beans are tender, and strain if clear soup
is required, or pass through a sieve for thick soup; add some cream
and milk, bring to the boil, flavour with salt, and serve.


=14. Marmite Vegetarian Soup.=

Take a dessertspoonful of Marmite, 1-pt. of water or vegetable stock,
a tablespoonful of fine sago or tapioca, a slice or two of any
vegetables, with a sprig of parsley and a little salt. Boil the
vegetables for a few minutes in the water, skim well, add the sago or
tapioca, and boil for an hour or over, then strain; stir the Marmite
in and serve hot. A delicious and cheap soup. A gill of milk or cream
boiled and added at the end--omit the same measure of water--is an
improvement in some cases.


=15. Almond Soup.=

(A nice Summer Soup).

One pint of white stock, 1 pint milk, 1 small breakfastcup of ground
almonds, 1-oz. butter, 3-ozs. minced onions, 1-oz. flour. Fry the
onion in the butter in a stewpan till a pale yellow colour, stir in
the flour, and when well blended, moisten with some of the stock,
adding the almonds, broth and milk by degrees till all are exhausted,
bring to the boil, skim, and simmer _gently_ for half an hour, pass
through a hair sieve. Serve with nicely cooked green peas.


=16. Celery Soup.=

Six heads of celery, 1 teaspoon of salt, a little nutmeg, 1 lump
sugar, 1 gill of stock, 1/2-pint of milk, and two quarts of boiling
water.

Cut the celery into small pieces and throw it into the boiling water
seasoned with nutmeg, salt and sugar, boil until sufficiently tender,
pass it through a sieve, add the stock, and simmer for half-an-hour,
then add the milk, bring it up to the boil and serve.


=17. Potato Soup.=

Four middle sized potatoes, a thick slice of bread, 3 leeks peeled and
cut into slices, a teacup of rice, salt and pepper to taste, 2 qts. of
water.

Bring the water up to boil, then put in all the ingredients except the
rice, pepper and salt, cover and let them come to a brisk boil, add
the rice and boil slowly for one hour.


=18. Pea Soup.=

Take 1-1/2 pints of split peas and 3 onions. Put the peas to soak
overnight, then cook with the onions until quite soft--pass through a
sieve, add 1 gill of milk, bring to the boil. Serve with squares of
fried bread or toast. Celery, salt, pepper and chopped mint may be
added to taste.


=19. Mock Hare Soup.=

Soak some haricot beans over night in boiling water, then stew them
for 2 hours in water with 2 onions, salt and pepper. When quite tender
pass them through the sieve, add 1-oz. ground walnuts, boil again for
5 minutes, add forced meat balls, and serve.


=20. Carrot Soup.=

Two lbs. carrots, 3-ozs. butter, seasoning to taste, 2 quarts of bean
stock or water.

Scrape the carrots, wash and wipe them quite dry, and cut in thick
slices; put the butter in a large stewpan and when melted put the
carrots in and stew gently for one hour without browning, then add the
stock or water and simmer until tender (about an hour). Pass them
through the sieve, add the seasoning and boil for 5 minutes; skim well
and serve.


=21. Onion Soup.=

Put about 2 doz. small onions in a stewpan with 1-oz. butter, cover
and let them stew for about 20 minutes, then add sufficient boiling
water to cover them, boil till quite tender, pass through a sieve,
boil up again, add the savoury seasoning and 1 gill of milk. A little
boiled macaroni chopped up fine may be added before serving.


=22. Carnos Soup.=

Two tablespoons of Carnos in a pint of boiling water makes a very
nourishing soup; it may be thickened with rice, vermicelli, spaghetti,
etc., if required, and served with fingers of toast.


=23. White Windsor Soup.=

Take 4 breakfastcups of white stock, then add 6 tablespoons of mashed
potatoes, and 1-oz. of sago. Stir over the fire till clear, then add 1
breakfastcupful of milk, and a little minced parsley. Let it come to
boiling point, but no more. Serve in a very hot tureen.




=SUBSTITUTES FOR FISH.=


=24. Mock Scallop Oysters.=

Scrape some salsify roots, boil them until tender, drain. Beat with
wooden spoon to a _smooth_ paste free of _fibre_. Moisten with cream,
add a teaspoonful of butter or a thick white sauce. Serve in fireproof
china, or in scallop shells. Put breadcrumbs on top, which have been
steeped in butter and browned.


=25. Mock Oyster Patties.=

Make the above mixture, put it into short puff paste made into
patties, and bake until a nice brown tint.


=26. Green Artichokes.=

(A substitute for Oysters).

Boil some green artichoke heads until tender (about 1 hour) and serve
hot. Mix some French wine vinegar and pure olive oil (one teaspoonful
of vinegar to three of oil) with a pinch of salt and pepper.

Strip off the leaves one by one and dip the fleshy ends in the
dressing; then scrape off the tender part of the leaf with the teeth.
When the leaves are stripped, cut out the centre of the 'crown' and
cut off its stalk quite short. Remove the seeds, and the crown itself
will then be found a bonne bouche.


=27. Fried Chinese Artichokes.=

Boil the artichokes until tender. After draining, drop them into
batter of fine breadcrumbs and egg. Fry crisp and serve with parsley
sauce and slices of lemon.


=28. Mock Fish Cutlets.=

Two ozs. rice, 4-ozs. white haricot beans, 1/2-gill of thick curry
sauce, pepper and salt, egg and breadcrumbs.

Make a thick curry sauce, add to it the boiled rice and beans chopped
up fine, pepper and salt. Cook together for a few minutes, then turn
out on a plate and leave to cool. Form into balls or small flat cakes,
dip in egg, then crumbs, and fry in boiling oil.


=29. Fillets of Mock Sole.=

Bring to a boil half a pint of milk, and stir in 2-ozs. of ground
rice. Add 1-oz. of butter, a teaspoonful of grated onion, and a pinch
of mace; also 3 large tablespoonfuls of potato which has been put
through a fine sieve. Mix and let all simmer slowly in the saucepan
for 15 minutes. The mixture should be fairly stiff. When removed from
the fire, add 1 egg and 1 yolk well beaten. Mix thoroughly, and turn
out on a flat dish not quite half an inch thick, and allow it to get
quite cold. Then divide into fillet-shaped pieces, brush over with the
beaten white of egg, toss in fine breadcrumbs, and fry in plenty of
smoking-hot fat. Drain, and serve very hot, garnished with slices of
lemon, and with Hollandaise sauce.


=30. Mock Fish Roe.=

Peel and slice 3 or 4 tomatoes, and put in a saucepan with nearly half
a pint of water, and some grated onion. Cook until the tomato is soft
and smooth; then sprinkle in sufficient maize meal to make the mixture
fairly stiff, add pepper and salt and one heaped tablespoonful of
grated cheese. Form into fillets or cutlets, and fry in the usual
way.


=31. Filleted Salsify.=

Cook some salsify until tender, slice it into quarters lengthways, and
cut it into 3-in. lengths; dip in egg and breadcrumbs, and fry crisp;
serve with parsley sauce (recipe 164), and garnish with slices of
lemon and parsley.


=32. Mock White Fish.=

Boil 1/2-pt. milk and thicken with rather more than 1-oz. of semolina,
to make a little stiffer than for rice mould. Add a lump of butter,
salt, a little grated onion and a saltspoonful of mace, and let all
cook together for 10 minutes, stirring frequently. Boil 3 potatoes and
put through masher, and whilst hot add to the semolina or it will not
set well. Pour into dish to stiffen, and when quite cold cut into
slices, roll in egg and white breadcrumbs, fry crisp in Nutter and
serve with parsley sauce as a fish course. The mixture must be stiff,
for the frying softens the semolina again.


=33. Mock Hake Steaks.=

Put in a pan 3-ozs. breadcrumbs, with 1/2-pint of milk and a pinch of
salt. Stir over a slow fire for a few minutes; then add 2-ozs. flour,
the yolk of 1 egg, 3-ozs. grated cheese, 1-oz. butter, and a pinch of
mace. Cook for fifteen minutes; when quite cold form into fritters,
dip in egg and breadcrumbs, and fry in boiling oil till a nice golden
brown. Serve with piquante sauce.




=SUBSTITUTES FOR MEAT DISHES.=


=34. Walnut Cutlets.=

Put a small cap of milk and 1/2-oz. of butter in a saucepan on the fire.
When it boils add 3-ozs. of _dried_ and _browned_ breadcrumbs and a
little dredging of flour. Let it cook until it no longer adheres to
the pan, and remove from the fire. When it is cool add 2 eggs, beating
until smooth, a large tablespoonful of shelled walnuts (previously run
through the nut mill), seasoning, and a little grated onion juice. Mix
well and shape into cakes about 1/2-in. thick on a floured board. Roll
in flour or egg and breadcrumbs, and fry. Serve with walnut gravy, or
round a dish of grilled tomatoes.


=35. Brown Bean Cutlets.=

Boil one pint of brown haricot beans until soft, strain and keep the
stock; pass the beans through a sieve and add a tablespoonful of
chopped parsley, a little grated onion, pepper, salt, a small piece of
butter, and, if liked, a few drops of A1 Sauce. Add breadcrumbs until
the right consistency is obtained for moulding into cutlet form. Egg,
crumb, and fry as usual. Serve with tomato sauce or a rich gravy.


=36. Green Pea Cutlets.=

Green pea cutlets, either fresh or dried, may be made the same way as
stated in the previous recipe, substituting a little chopped mint for
the parsley and onion, and serving with mint sauce, and a nice brown
gravy made from the green pea stock.


=37. Haricot Cutlets.=

Boil 1-pt. of brown or white haricot beans with one or two onions till
quite soft, strain and pass through a sieve, add some chopped parsley,
a tablespoonful of grated pine kernels, a little tapioca (previously
soaked in cold water), pepper and salt and a few breadcrumbs. Mould
into cutlets, egg, crumb, and fry. Serve with sliced lemon and parsley
sauce, or with brown gravy.


=38. Walnut Rissoles.=

Take 1/2-pt. ground walnuts, 1/2-pt. breadcrumbs, 1-oz. butter, 1-oz.
flour, a little milk, chopped parsley, and pepper and salt to taste.
Make a thick white sauce with butter, flour and milk, add all the
other ingredients. Mix well and form into rissoles, dip in egg, then
in crumbs, and fry crisp in boiling oil. These may be glazed and eaten
cold with a salad and mint sauce.


=39. Stuffed Vegetable Marrow.=

Peel a medium sized marrow, and remove the seeds, keeping the marrow
whole. Prepare the following stuffing:--

Mix 2 or 3 chopped and fried onions, 6-ozs. pine kernels (these should
be ground and also fried with the onions), 6-ozs. breadcrumbs, pepper
and salt, 1 chopped hard boiled egg, and 1 raw egg to bind. Fill the
marrow with this mixture, and steam for half an hour to partly cook
the marrow. Now place in a baking tin, cover with breadcrumbs, place
some small pieces of butter on top, and bake for another half hour
until the marrow is quite soft and a nice rich brown. Serve with brown
gravy.


=40. Purée of Walnuts.=

Make a white sauce with 1-oz. butter, 1-oz. flour, 1/2-teacup of milk,
add 1/2-pint of ground walnuts, 1/2-pint breadcrumbs, and 2 dessertspoons
of milk, and beat well. About three-quarters of an hour before serving,
add the white of 1 egg stirred in lightly and pour into a mould. Steam
for half an hour, serve with mashed potatoes.


=41. Nut Croquettes.=

Take 1/2-pint of mixed and shelled nuts, 4 or 5 mashed potatoes, 1
chopped and fried onion, and a pinch of mace. Chop the nuts, or pass
through a nut-mill, and add them to the potato, with the onion and
seasoning. Form into croquettes, brush over with egg, and cover with
fine breadcrumbs and fry in boiling oil. Serve with bread sauce.


=42. Mock Chicken Cutlets.=

A tasty dish to be served with bread sauce is prepared as
follows:--Run through the nut mill 2 cups of breadcrumbs and 1 good
cup of shelled walnuts. Mix these together with a small piece of
butter, a tablespoonful of grated onion juice, and a teaspoonful of
mace. Melt a large teaspoonful of butter in a saucepan, with half a
teaspoonful of flour and add gradually 2 cups of fresh milk; when this
boils add the other ingredients, salt and pepper to taste, add a
beaten egg, and when removed from the fire, a teaspoonful of lemon
juice. Stir well and turn out into a dish to cool, then shape into
cutlets, dip in egg, then in breadcrumbs, as usual, and fry crisp.


=43. Mock Sweetbread Quenelles.=

Put 1 pint of milk in a saucepan to boil with 1 onion chopped fine,
when it boils add 3-ozs. of semolina stirring all the time, boil for
15 minutes, then add 1-oz. of breadcrumbs, 1-oz of butter, 1 egg,
pepper and salt to taste. Mix well and steam in a buttered basin for
half-an-hour, then cut out in pieces the shape of an egg (with a deep
spoon), pile them in the centre of the dish, and pour thick white
sauce over them, garnish with green peas, and carrots very finely
chopped.


=44. White Haricot Cutlets.=

Skin and stew till quite tender 1/2-pint of white haricot beans in
sufficient water to cover them. Add 2 small onions grated, 1
tablespoon of milk or cream, pepper and salt to taste. Simmer a little
longer, and beat till quite smooth. Take off the fire, and add enough
breadcrumbs to make fairly firm, form into cutlets, dip in egg, then
in crumbs, and fry crisp. Serve with brown or tomato sauce.


=45. Lentil Cutlets.=

Take a teacup of Egyptian lentils; boil them in water sufficient to
cover until tender. Add 3 grated onions, some chopped parsley and
thyme, and enough breadcrumbs to make a stiff mixture. Turn on to
large plates and flatten with a knife. Then cut into eight triangular
sections and shape them like small cutlets. When cold, roll in egg,
then in breadcrumbs, and fry crisp after inserting small pieces of
macaroni into each pointed end. Serve with mint or tomato sauce, and
with vegetables.


=46. Mushroom Pie, with Gravy.=

Take 1/4-lb. butter beans, 1/4-lb. mushrooms, 1-lb. chestnuts, 2 onions, 1
hard boiled egg, 1 teacupful tapioca (soaked overnight), some short
crust pastry.

Fill a pie dish with alternate layers of above ingredients, with
seasoning to taste; the onions and mushrooms should be fried, the
chestnuts boiled and peeled, the butter beans cooked the day before
until quite soft, and the egg cut into slices. Cover with the pastry
made as follows:--1/2-lb. of flour, 1/4-lb. nut-butter, mixed with cold
water. Brush over with beaten egg and bake.

GRAVY. Melt 1-oz. of butter in a saucepan, stir in a tablespoon of
flour, and cook till a rich dark brown, stirring all the time, add
half-a-pint of vegetable stock and being to the boil. Before serving
add half-a-teaspoonful of Marmite.


=47. Baked Nuttoria.=

Open a tin of Nuttoria, cut into slices 1/2-inch in thickness, bake for
an hour, well dressed with butter. Serve with vegetables and with rich
gravy made from brown haricot beans, thickened with arrowroot, and
flavoured with fried onion and a good piquant sauce (such as Brand's
A1). Yorkshire pudding makes a suitable addition.


=48. Lentil Croquettes.=

Wash, pick and cook 1/4-lb. lentils, with 1 or 2 onions to flavour. When
cooked, add about 5-ozs. wholemeal breadcrumbs, a teaspoonful parsley,
nutmeg, mace, salt and pepper, and 1 egg beaten. Mix well, and when
cold form into balls. Dip in egg, then crumbs, and fry a golden brown.
Serve with onion sauce and gravy.


=49. Protose Cutlets.=

Pound a tin of Protose with 1-oz. of fresh butter, some grated onion
juice, parsley, thyme, salt and pepper, a few breadcrumbs, and a few
drops of lemon juice. Roll the mixture on a floured board until about
1/2-inch thick, shape into cutlets, roll in egg, then in crumbs and fry.
As Protose does not require previous cooking this is a very quickly
prepared dish, and if a few tins are kept in stock it is always handy
for emergencies. The cutlets may be fried without egg and breadcrumbs,
simply rolled in a little flour, if one is very pressed for time.
Serve with tomato or onion sauce, or a rich gravy.


=50. Savoury Nut-Meat Steaks.=

Cut some slices of Protose about 3/8-inch thick, and bake in a tin,
basted with butter, for an hour. Roll in egg, then in crumbs, and fry
in butter for a few minutes. Serve with fried forcemeat balls, red
currant jelly, and brown haricot gravy flavoured with fried onion,
cloves and some piquant sauce, thickened with arrowroot. Masked
potatoes (placed round) complete this dish.


=51. Nut-Meat à la Mode.=

Take a tin of Nuttoria (1/2-lb.) and pass it through the nut-mill. Beat
the whites and yolks of 4 eggs separately. Mix these with the
nut-meat, adding 2-ozs. stale brown breadcrumbs, some grated onion,
chopped parsley and herbs. Press into a basin and steam until well
cooked. Serve with white parsley sauce thickened with arrowroot. This
dish tastes exactly as if it were made with minced beef.


=52. Nut-Meat Rissoles.=

Put some Protose, Fibrose (brown), Nuttoria, or other nut-meat through
the nut-mill before cooking. Fry slowly with some chopped onion. Cover
with brown stock, and cook slowly until nearly all the gravy is
absorbed. Then add breadcrumbs, herbs, seasoning, and a little butter,
stir thoroughly over the fire, and set aside on a plate to cool. Form
the mixture into small rolls, dip in egg, roll in breadcrumbs, and
fry. Garnish with parsley, and serve with onion sauce or brown gravy.


=53. Jugged Nuttose.=

Bake some Nuttose (dressed with butter) for half-an-hour, in slices
half-an-inch thick; then dip in egg and breadcrumbs, and fry. Also
make some forcemeat balls by rubbing 1/2-oz. of butter in 5-ozs. of
breadcrumbs, adding chopped lemon thyme, lemon peel and parsley, some
pepper and salt, and 1 egg to bind; fry very brown. Cut up the Nuttose
in quarter pieces and stew slowly in remainder of the bean stock with
about 10 cloves. Garnish with sprays of parsley and the forcemeat
balls. Serve with red currant jelly and mashed potatoes.


=54. Nuttose Ragout.=

A good way to prepare Nuttose is as follows:--Fry a teaspoonful of
butter until quite brown, add flour until it absorbs the butter, add
gradually any vegetable stock until a nice rich gravy results. Bring
to the boil and add very thin slices of Nuttose. Stew very slowly for
1 hour, adding some Worcester or other sauce to taste. Garnish with
mashed potatoes and serve with a green vegetable.


=55. Minced Nut-meat.=

Prepare a tin of Protose or other nut-meat by running it through a
mincing machine, or mashing it with a fork, and stewing it in
vegetable gravy. Serve with a border of green peas or beans, and with
mashed potatoes placed round the outside of the dish. It is also nice
served as follows, viz.:--Prepare as for minced meat. Boil a cupful of
rice as for curry. When cooked stir in one teaspoonful of tomato sauce
and seasoning. Put the mince in the centre of the dish with a wall of
the rice and tomato round it.


=56. Lentil and Potato Sausages.=

Boil 5-ozs. lentils in very little water, so that when cooked all
water is absorbed, then add 1 chopped and fried onion, a tiny pinch of
herbs, pepper and salt, 4 boiled and mashed potatoes, and the _yolk_
of 1 egg. Allow to cool a little, then flour the hands, and form into
sausage shape. Brush over with white of egg and fry in boiling oil.
Decorate with parsley and serve with a border of green peas.


=57. Stuffed Yorkshire Pudding.=

For the stuffing:--1/4-lb. cooked lentils, 1 onion chopped and fried, a
pinch of herbs, 2 tablespoonfuls of breadcrumbs, and seasoning.

For the batter:--1/4-lb. of flour, 1/2-pint of milk, 1 egg.

Mix the batter and partly bake for 20 minutes; remove from oven,
spread with stuffing, roll up carefully, return to oven and bake
brown. Serve with apple sauce and brown gravy.


=58. Mushroom and Potato Croquettes.=

Take some stiff mashed potatoes. Make a stuffing with 1/4-lb. minced and
fried mushrooms, 2-ozs. chopped and cooked macaroni, and 1
tablespoonful breadcrumbs, moisten with a little beaten egg. Shape 2
rounds of potato, make a hollow in one, fill with the stuffing and
press the other over it. Roll in egg, then in breadcrumbs, and fry
crisp.


=59. Mock Steak Pudding.=

Take 1-lb. chestnuts, 1/4-lb. mushrooms, 1 onion, 1-oz. butter, 1/2-pint
stock, a few forcemeat balls, and 4-ozs. of pine kernels. Make a thick
brown gravy with the butter, onion and stock, boil the chestnuts,
remove the skins and husks and add them to the gravy, with pepper and
salt to taste, simmer for 15 minutes. Line a buttered basin with a
good crust (allowing 4-ozs. rolled and chopped pine kernels and 1/2-oz.
butter to 8-ozs. flour) and put in a layer of the chestnut mixture,
then a layer of chopped mushroom and forcemeat balls till the basin is
quite full; cover with a thick crust and boil for 2-1/2 hours.


=60. Mock Chicken Rolls.=

Take 1 cup brazil nuts, 2 cups breadcrumbs, 1 gill milk, 1 oz. butter,
a little pepper and salt, mace, a few drops of lemon juice. Melt the
butter and add the milk and flour to it, cook for a few minutes, add
the breadcrumbs and ground nuts, then the other ingredients, mix well
and turn over on a plate to cool. Form into rolls, dip into egg, then
in breadcrumbs, and fry in boiling oil.

Serve with bread sauce and mashed potatoes.


=61. Savoury Sausages.=

Make of the same ingredients as in recipe No. 64. Pound well in a
basin, season rather highly, add a few chopped mushrooms, and a little
butter. Leave to get quite cold. Then form into sausages, with
well-floured hands, brush over with beaten egg, and fry or bake till
crisp and brown. They may need a little basting if they are baked.


=62. Savoury Chestnut Mould.=

Peel two dozen chestnuts and stew gently in vegetable stock until
nearly soft. Now remove half the chestnuts, and continue to cook the
remainder until quite soft, gradually reducing the stock. Mash the
contents of the pan with a fork, then stir in 2 tablespoonfuls of
breadcrumbs, 2-ozs. of butter, pepper and salt, 1 egg, and lastly the
partly cooked chestnuts, cut into neat pieces. Well grease a basin or
mould, pour in the mixture and steam three-quarters of an hour, and
serve with brown gravy or onion sauce. The main point about this dish
is to retain the flavour of the chestnut without the addition of
herbs, &c., &c.


=63. Walnut Pie.=

(A Tasty Dish).

Put 4-ozs. of shelled walnuts through a mincer. Put a layer of boiled
rice at the bottom of a buttered baking dish. Spread half the minced
nuts evenly on top of the rice, then a layer of tomatoes, seasoned
with onion, pepper and salt, mace, and ketchup, then another layer of
rice, more nuts, etc., till the dish is nearly full. Cover thickly
with breadcrumbs, pour melted butter over, and bake a nice brown.
Serve with tomato sauce.


=64. Savoury Lentil Roll.=

Take 2 teacupfuls of boiled German lentils, put in a basin, and add a
cupful of fine breadcrumbs, and about half as much mashed potatoes.
Add any seasoning--ketchup, Worcester sauce--and a spoonful of melted
butter. Mix well with a fork and bind with 1 or 2 beaten eggs,
reserving a little for brushing over. Shape into a brick or oval, and
press together as firmly as possible. Brush over with the remainder of
the egg, put into a buttered tin and bake for half an hour. Serve with
a garnish of beetroot or tomatoes.


=65. Pine Kernel Timbale.=

Well grease a basin and line it with partly cooked macaroni; start at
the bottom of the basin, and coil each piece carefully round, all
touching, until the basin is completely lined. Now carefully fill with
the following farce:--Fry in 2-ozs. of butter two or three chopped
onions, then add about 6-ozs. of pine-kernels, having first ground
them in a nut-mill, continue frying till a pale brown, then turn into
a basin and add about 1/2-lb. breadcrumbs, pepper and salt, and 2 eggs.
Cover the basin with greased paper and steam one hour. Remove
carefully from the basin and pour round a nice brown gravy.




=SIMPLE SAVOURY DISHES.=


=66. Macaroni Napolitaine.=

Boil 1/2-lb. best quality macaroni (large) in plenty of water, strain
and place on a dish; take a dessertspoonful of cornflour, mix
thoroughly with a little milk, add milk to make half a pint, boil
until it thickens, add half an ounce of grated cheese, a small knob of
butter, and a few tablespoonfuls of tomato sauce or tomato conserve.
The tomato sauce can be made by slicing 4 tomatoes and cooking them in
a saucepan with a little batter and chopped onion. Pass through a
strainer. Pour the sauce over the macaroni or serve in a sauce boat.


=67. Macaroni à la Turque.=

Boil 1/4-lb. of macaroni until _slightly_ tender, and add 1/2-lb. of
grated breadcrumbs, 1 large onion (grated), 2 large tablespoons of
parsley, some grated nutmeg, 1/2-pint milk, and 1 egg (beaten). Chop the
macaroni and mix all well together and steam in a basin or in moulds
for 1 or 1-1/2 hours. Serve with thin white sauce or brown gravy (poured
over the mould).


=68. Macaroni Cutlets.=

Boil 1/4-lb. macaroni (Spaghetti) in water, not making it too tender;
chop slightly, add 6-ozs. breadcrumbs, some chopped fried onions, a
teaspoonful of lemon thyme, and parsley, a couple of tomatoes (fried
in saucepan after onions), and 1 egg to bind. Mix, roll in flour,
shape into cutlets, fry until crisp and brown. Serve with piquant or
tomato sauce.


=69. Savoury Macaroni.=

Boil some macaroni for half an hour, drain well and add 1-oz. butter,
1 beaten egg, pepper and salt, 1 peeled and sliced tomato. Heat all
thoroughly together and serve.


=70. Creamed Macaroni.=

Break 1/4-lb. macaroni into 1-inch pieces, drop them into 2-qts. of
_boiling_ water, (salted), boil till tender. Drain and place in a
dish. At serving time put into a pan a tablespoon of butter, when
melted, a tablespoon of flour, rub until well mixed, then add 1/2-pint
of milk, stir until it bubbles; a little cayenne to be added, then put
in the macaroni and heat thoroughly, and just at the last, stir in
1/4-lb. of grated cheese (not quite half ought to be Parmesan and the
rest a good fresh cheese).


=71. Macaroni and Tomato Pudding.=

Boil some macaroni and mix with it 3-ozs. of grated cheese, 4 peeled
and sliced tomatoes, a little chopped parsley, and half a teacup of
milk. Place in a pie-dish and cover with a thick layer of fine
breadcrumbs and a few knobs of butter; season to taste. Bake until
nicely browned. The addition of a grated onion is considered an
improvement by many persons.


=72. How to Cook Rice.=

First boil the water, then put the rice in, and keep it on the boil
for twelve minutes; if it wants to boil over just lift the lid of
saucepan to let the steam escape. After boiling strain in a strainer,
and steam it when wanted for use.

To steam the boiled rice, put it in a colander and stand the colander
in a saucepan containing a little boiling water, so that the colander
and rice are clear of the water, put saucepan on the hot plate, and
the steam from the water will dry and separate out each grain of rice
and make it flakey.

Savoury rice dishes can be made more rich in proteid, and more tasty,
by adding a few teaspoons of Emprote.


=73. Rice (Milanese).=

(Specially recommended).

Boil 6-ozs. of unpolished rice in a double saucepan until tender. Fry
a chopped onion brown, then add 2 peeled tomatoes and cook until soft,
add this to the rice with the yolks of 2 eggs, 1/2-teaspoonful of salt,
and 1-1/2-ozs. of Parmesan or grated cheese. Mix well together and serve
with brown gravy. This makes a most tasty and nutritious dish.


=74. Rice alla Romana.=

Boil 6-ozs. of unpolished rice with a clove of garlic. Fry 4 peeled
tomatoes in 1-oz. butter. Add this to the rice with the yolk of 1 egg,
1/2-teaspoonful of salt, and 1-oz. of Parmesan or grated cheese. Stir
and serve with tomato sauce, or garnish with baked tomatoes. This dish
is equally suitable for lunch, dinner, or supper; it is a 'complete'
type of food, and it is much appreciated. The flavour can easily be
varied.


=75. Savoury Rice.=

Boil 1/4-lb. of rice till quite soft, add a teaspoonful of chopped
parsley, a little grated lemon rind, 4-ozs. grated cheese, 1
tablespoonful of milk and a little butter, mix well and put into
scollop shells, sprinkle over with breadcrumbs and bake for 20
minutes.


=76. proteid Rice Cutlets.=

Delicious rice cutlets can be made as follows:--Fry 2 grated onions
brown, then add 2 tomatoes in the same pan and cook till tender. Cook
a large cupful of rice in a double saucepan, turn it into a basin, add
the onions and tomatoes, a teaspoonful of chopped parsley, 2-ozs. of
breadcrumbs, 2-ozs. of Emprote, and pepper and salt to taste. Mix
well, turn out on plates and smooth with a wet knife, cut into fingers
and fry crisp in egg and breadcrumbs. Serve with tomato sauce or brown
gravy.


=77. Sicilian Rice.=

Fry in 1-oz. butter, one good handful of chopped parsley and one
finely chopped onion, until the latter is a pale brown colour; now add
equal quantities of boiled rice and nicely cooked cabbage or sprouts
(chopped), pepper and salt, and a small teaspoonful of sugar. Mix all
together and heat thoroughly. Serve.


=78. Curried Rice and Peas.=

(An Indian Dish).

Cook some rice in a jar until nicely swollen, put it in a saucepan,
add one or two fried onions (and some young carrots chopped fine if
desired), some vegetable stock, a dessertspoonful of Lazenby's Mango
chutney, and 1 or 2 teaspoonfuls of Stembridge's curry paste, until
the rice has a rich curry flavour, to taste. Warm 1/2-pint of small
French green peas (use fresh ones in season) with sugar and mint, pour
them in the centre of the dish, place the curried rice round them and
garnish with small fingers of pastry. Serve with fried potatoes and
cauliflower. This dish is easily made and very easy of digestion.


=79. Risi Piselli.=

(A Popular Italian Dish).

Fry some finely chopped parsley and onion till the latter is a
light-brown colour. Have ready equal quantities of cooked rice and
young green peas, boiled separately (let the rice be dry, well cooked,
and each grain separate), add these to the onions and parsley, and
stir well together in the pan. Serve very hot.


=80. Rice and Tomato Rissoles.=

Fry 2 onions brown, then add 4 peeled tomatoes, cook till tender, turn
into a bowl and chop finely with some parsley and thyme. At the same
time cook a small cupful of rice in a double pan. Mix this with the
onions, etc., with pepper and salt, and 2-ozs. of breadcrumbs. Mix
well, then put on plates, smooth over, and when quite cold cut into
rissoles, egg, then crumb and fry. Serve with a rich brown gravy.


=81. A Simple Omelette.=

Take 2 eggs, 1 teaspoon chopped parsley, a little chopped onion,
pepper and salt. Beat the yolks and whites separately and then add the
other ingredients. Heat some butter in a frying pan until very hot,
then pour in the mixture and keep putting a knife round the outside to
prevent the omelette adhering, and to make the uncooked centre flow
towards the rim. When nicely set fold and serve on a hot plate.


=82. Omelette aux Tomates.=

Take 3 eggs, 1/4-pt. of milk, a teaspoonful chopped parsley, and a taste
of grated onion juice, pepper and salt. Whisk all in a basin so as to
mix thoroughly. Heat 1-oz. of butter in a frying-pan, then pour in
the mixture and keep putting the knife round the outside to prevent
the omelette adhering, and to make the uncooked centre flow towards
the rim. When nicely set, fold and serve on a hot dish, either with
tomato sauce, or garnished with baked tomatoes.


=83. Eggs Florentine.=

Boil some spinach in water containing a pinch of salt and soda, for
about 10 minutes. Strain well, rub through a sieve, and add a
well-beaten egg. Arrange in a fireproof dish, a thin layer in the
centre and a good ridge all round, and put into the oven for about 10
minutes. Now poach a few eggs and lay in the centre, and sprinkle some
Parmesan cheese over all, add some cheese sauce.


=84. Eggs à la Crême.=

Place a large tablespoonful of cream in each of several small
fireproof china baking or soufflé dishes (about 3-1/2-inches in
diameter). Break an egg in each one, and steam them in a frying pan in
water 1 inch deep until well cooked. Some persons who cannot digest
lightly cooked eggs can safely take them if quite hard.


=85. Mayonnaise Eggs.=

Boil the eggs hard, which takes about 15 minutes, then put them in
cold water; when cold, shell them and cut a piece off the end of each
so that they will stand upright on the dish; pour thick mayonnaise
sauce over them and sprinkle with chopped capers.


=86. Eggs à l'Italienne.=

Boil 1/4-lb. of spaghetti in water, adding some tomato purée or
conserve, and spread it on a dish. Poach 4 eggs and lay them on the
spaghetti, sprinkle finely chopped parsley over the eggs and decorate
the dish with fried croûtons.


=87. Omelette aux Fines Herbes.=

Melt 1-oz. of butter in a perfectly dry frying pan. Beat the yolks of
3 eggs with some finely chopped parsley and a pinch of garlic powder,
pepper and salt. When the butter boils pour in the egg and stir until
it commences to set. Then pour in the whites of the eggs (previously
beaten to a stiff froth). When cooked fold the omelette and turn on to
a very hot dish. Cover at once and serve.


=88. Scrambled Eggs and Tomatoes.=

Peel 4 large tomatoes after dipping them in scalding water, slice and
stew them in a little butter for a few minutes; beat 2 eggs, add them
to the tomatoes, and scramble them until the egg is cooked. Serve on
toast. Green peas may be used for this dish instead of tomatoes.


=89. Oeufs Farcie en Aspic.=

Boil 4 eggs hard and remove the shells and take out the yolks, beat
them in a bowl, and then add 2 teaspoons of salad oil and a little
chopped parsley and thyme, a few breadcrumbs, pepper and salt, mix all
well and fill in each white half, even over with a knife, and glaze.
Serve with Salad and Mayonnaise Sauce.


=90. Spinach and Eggs.=

Take 3 or 4-lbs. of spinach, boil it in plenty of water with a pinch
of soda and salt for 10 minutes, press through a strainer, and then
rub through a wire sieve; place it in a saucepan with a small piece of
butter and a tablespoonful of milk, stir well whilst being warmed up,
and serve on buttered toast or fried bread, garnish with fingers of
pastry. Rub 2 hard boiled eggs through a sieve and spread on the top.
Decorate with the white of the eggs when sliced.


=91. Spinach à la Crême.=

Prepare the spinach as described above, but instead of adding butter
and milk, add 2 or 3 tablespoons of cream. Stir well and serve with
fingers of fried bread or pastry. Omit the garnishing of eggs.


=92. Spinach Soufflé.=

Cook some spinach (see recipe 90), pass it through sieve and add 2 or
3 well beaten eggs and a small amount of milk, with pepper and salt.
Mix it thoroughly, put it in well buttered soufflé dishes and bake for
10 minutes. This makes a simple yet tasty entrée.


=93. Green Pea Soufflé.=

Pass some cooked green peas through a sieve, add pepper and salt, a
teaspoonful of sugar, a very little milk, and the yolks of 2 or 3
eggs, according to quantity of peas. Beat the whites of eggs till a
stiff froth, add to the mixture and bake quickly in an oiled soufflé
dish or small cases.


=94. Chestnut Soufflé.=

Boil 1-lb of chestnuts until they are quite soft, remove the skins and
pass through a nut-mill, moisten with 1/4-pt. of milk and 1/2-oz. butter
(melted), add pepper and salt, the yolks of 3 eggs and lastly the
whites, beaten to a stiff froth. Pour into a greased soufflé dish and
bake quickly.


=95. Lentil Soufflé.=

Cook 2-ozs. of lentils in very little water (so that when cooked the
moisture is absorbed), add 1-oz. of butter, pepper and salt, 1
tablespoonful of milk, and the yolks of 3 eggs. Beat the whites to a
stiff froth and fold lightly into the mixture. Pour into an oiled
soufflé dish and bake quickly.


=96. Asparagus Soufflé.=

Take some asparagus (previously boiled) and rub it through a sieve.
Add 2 or 3 well beaten eggs and a small quantity of milk, with pepper
and salt. Beat it well and put in buttered soufflé dishes and bake for
10 minutes. This makes a tasty course for a luncheon or dinner, and
also a simple supper dish.


=97. Cabbage Soufflé.=

Take some well-cooked cabbage or Brussels sprouts, pass through a
sieve, add pepper and salt, a little milk, and well beat in the yolks
of 2 or 3 eggs. Beat the whites to a stiff froth and stir lightly into
the mixture. Pour into the soufflé dish in which has been melted a
small piece of butter. Bake quickly in a good oven.


=98. Savoury Rissoles.=

Equal quantities of mashed wholemeal bread and boiled rice, add a
little boiled onion minced fine, some pepper, salt and butter. Mix,
roll into shape, or pass through a sausage machine, dredge with flour,
dip in batter, and fry crisp. A great variety can be made by
introducing lentils, macaroni or haricots, with herbs, fried onions,
breadcrumbs, etc., and an egg.


=99. Kedgeree.=

Two cups of boiled rice, 2 hard boiled eggs, 1-oz. butter, 1 onion,
1-oz. sultanas, pepper and salt. Fry the onion in the butter till
brown, then add the rice, eggs, and seasoning, mix well and serve very
hot.


=100. Savoury Cheese Rissoles.=

Put 1/2-pint of hot water and 2-ozs. butter in a saucepan and bring to
the boil, sift in slowly 5-ozs. of flour and cook this mixture
thoroughly until it will leave the pan clean. Take it off the fire and
add a little cayenne, finely chopped parsley, 4-ozs. breadcrumbs,
2-ozs. grated cheese, and 1 egg beaten in separately. When the mixture
is quite cool, roll it into balls with flour and fry them. Decorate
the dish with parsley and serve hot with a garnish of mashed potatoes.
A brown sauce is an improvement.


=101. A Corsican Dish.=

Take 1-lb. Brussels sprouts, and sauté them, 1-lb. chestnuts, boil and
peel them, and then fry in butter. Pile in centre of dish and surround
with the sprouts. Decorate with croûtons and serve hot.


=102. Brussels Sprouts Sauté.=

Blanch the sprouts and drain well. Put into a wide saucepan with some
butter and seasoning. Place on a hot fire and shake frequently for
five minutes. Serve hot.


=103. Spinach Fritters.=

Chop finely, or pass through a sieve, 1-lb. of cooked spinach, season
with salt and pepper and add the yolk of 1 egg and sufficient
breadcrumbs to make the mixture stiff. Form into flat, round cakes,
dip into frying batter and cook in boiling fat. Serve with a garnish
of scrambled eggs.


=104. Baked Stuffed Tomatoes.=

Remove the centre from half a dozen tomatoes, mince this and add some
chopped parsley, 1/4-lb. grated nuts, 2-ozs. breadcrumbs, pepper and
salt to taste and one egg. Fill the tomatoes with this mixture and
bake for half an hour, first placing a small piece of butter on each
tomato.


=105. A Breakfast Dish.=

Take some large tomatoes, cut them in halves and scoop out the inside.
Break some eggs and put each in a cup, and slide one egg into each
half tomato. Put a little chopped parsley on each, and bake in the
oven until the white of the egg is set. Serve on rounds of toast.


=106. Vegetable Marrow Stuffed.=

Grate some nuts, add the same quantity of breadcrumbs, season, bind
with one egg. Take a small marrow, cut in halves, scoop out the seeds,
put in the stuffing, place it in a cloth upright in a saucepan with
water, and steam for one hour.


=107. Tomatoes au Gratin.=

Take some large tomatoes, cut in halves, take out the pulp. Make a
stuffing of nut-meat, or of grated nuts, bind with one egg, and fill
up the tomatoes. Sprinkle a little grated cheese and breadcrumbs and a
dab of butter on each tomato round. Place in a tin, and bake in the
oven for twenty minutes, and serve on croûtons.


=108. Brussels Sprouts à la Simone.=

(An Italian dish)

Wash and boil the sprouts in the usual way, drain dry, and put them in
a hot dish. Have ready a sauce made with 2-ozs. of butter, 2
tablespoonfuls of flour, add 1/2 a pint of stock and stir till it boils;
just before serving add a good sprinkling of pepper and the juice of
half a lemon; pour the sauce over the sprouts and serve.


=109. Potato Purée.=

Boil some large potatoes until soft, strain off the water, and dry
them, mash with a silver fork, mix in a little salt and pepper, some
butter and a cupful of hot milk, beat well until the mixture is quite
smooth and creamy. Serve very hot.


=110. Onions à la Mode Francaise.=

Take some Spanish onions, peel them, and make a hole in the centre,
and put in each onion a small piece of butter and one lump of sugar.
Add a little pepper and salt, and simmer in a covered stewpan for 2
hours. The onions should then be cooked, and surrounded with a rich
gravy of their own.


=111. Escalloped Potatoes.=

Mix a pint and a half of cold potatoes cut in cubes and seasoned with
salt, and a pint of cream sauce. Put the mixture in shallow baking
dish, cover with grated breadcrumbs, and dot with butter. Bake half an
hour in moderate oven.


=112. Baked Vegetable Marrow.=

Mix together 1/2-oz. of butter with 5-ozs. breadcrumbs, rubbing it well
in. Add a fried onion, some parsley and thyme, some sage and some
lemon rind, and bind with an egg. Scoop out the marrow, and place the
stuffing in quite dry; then steam in a cloth. Dress with brown gravy
and fried breadcrumbs, and place for a few minutes in a hot oven.


=113. Milanese Croquettes.=

Pass 2 hard boiled eggs through a sieve, then mix with 3 or 4-ozs. of
cold mashed potatoes. Add pepper and salt to taste, and nutmeg. Form
into little rolls and dip into egg and breadcrumbs, then fry crisp.


=114. Green Lentil Cutlets.=

Slice and fry till brown 1 large onion, then add 1/2-pint of green
lentils (well washed), and cover with water or stock, bring to the
boil, and simmer gently till quite tender. Rub through a sieve to keep
back the skins; add 2-ozs. of breadcrumbs, 1-oz. mashed potatoes, a
little chopped parsley and some mushroom ketchup, salt and pepper to
taste. Make into cutlet shapes, roll in flour, or egg and breadcrumbs,
and fry crisp. Serve with brown gravy.


=115. Chestnut and Mushroom Pudding.=

Line a pudding basin with good short pastry, then fill it with layers
of white haricots (skinned and steamed till nearly tender), fried
onion, tapioca, (previously soaked for 1 or 2 hours in cold water),
finely chopped parsley, fried mushrooms, and some chestnuts (skinned
and boiled till nearly tender), also a sprinkling of salt and pepper
between the layers. Pour over all some nicely seasoned mushroom gravy;
cover with pastry, tie a floured cloth over it, and steam for 3 hours.


=116. Savoury Golden Marbles.=

Take nearly 1/2-pt. of white haricot beans, cooked and pulped through a
sieve, and add 2-ozs. of breadcrumbs, 2-ozs. of mashed potatoes, a
small onion finely minced, and pepper and salt to taste. Add 1 beaten
egg. Mix thoroughly, and form into marbles. Coat with the remainder of
the egg, toss in fine breadcrumbs, and fry crisp and light brown.


=117. Potato Croquettes.=

Boil 2-lbs. of potatoes, well dry them, mash thoroughly with 1/2-oz.
butter and 1 beaten egg. Lay on a dish until cold. Shape into balls,
dip in egg and breadcrumbs, and fry crisp.


=118. Curried Lentils.=

Stew some green lentils in vegetable stock, and when quite soft stir
in a teaspoonful of Stembridge's curry paste, a fried onion, a chopped
apple, and some chutney. Mix it well. Serve with a border of boiled
rice, and fingers of pastry or fried bread, and some chipped
potatoes.


=119. Yorkshire Savoury Pudding.=

Take 3 eggs, 5 tablespoons of flour, 1 pint of milk, 1 large onion,
pepper and salt to taste. Beat the whites of the eggs to a stiff
froth, mix the yolks with the milk, flour and condiments, lightly mix
in the whites and pour into one or two well greased pudding tins which
should have been made hot. Bake 20 minutes. The pudding should not be
more than three-eighths of an inch in thickness, and should be of a
nice brown colour.


=120. Cauliflower (au Gratin).=

Boil 1 or 2 cauliflowers (after removing leaves) until tender. Strain
off the water and place on a dish. Cover with grated cheese, some
white sauce and some fried breadcrumbs. Add some knobs of butter and
bake until a nice brown. This dish is very savoury, and is useful for
supper or as a separate course for dinner.


=121. Curried Cauliflower.=

Wash a nice fresh cauliflower carefully, then boil it in salted water
until it is quite tender, be careful that it does not break, drain it
well from the water, place it in a hot dish, arrange it in a neat
compact shape, pressing it gently together with a nice clean cloth,
pour over some curry sauce and serve with or without a rice border.


=122. Grilled Tomatoes.=

Halve some ripe tomatoes, place them in a frying pan with a teacupful
of water, put a small piece of butter on each piece. Cook them until
tender. Serve on toast. Poached eggs or mushrooms are a nice addition
to this dish.


=123. Neapolitan Sausages.=

Soak 2 tablespoons of tapioca for 1 hour or more, then add 1/2-lb. of
breadcrumbs, 1 hard boiled egg, 2 tablespoons of olive oil, 1
teaspoonful chopped parsley, and a little thyme, and pepper and salt
to taste. Mix well with half a raw egg. Make into sausage shape, roll
in egg, then in breadcrumbs, and fry crisp, or bake in a tin with a
little butter in a sharp oven. Serve with brown gravy and apple sauce.


=124. Lentil Pudding.=

Stew some green lentils until soft; stir in some of Stembridge's curry
paste and add chutney to taste. Season with salt and butter, cover
with mashed potatoes and bake.


=125. Savoury Rice Pudding.=

Put 1 teacupful of rice in a medium sized pie dish, and fill it with
milk; chop finely or grate 4 small onions, beat 1 egg, mix altogether,
add a tablespoonful of chopped parsley and a little salt; bake in a
slow oven. After 20 minutes, stir the pudding thoroughly, adding a
small piece of butter, and a little more milk if necessary.


=126. Croûtes a la Valencia.=

Two ozs. almonds, 1 hard boiled egg, 1 oz. fresh butter, 1 teaspoonful
olive oil, salt and pepper, 8 small rounds of fried bread. Blanch the
almonds and fry them slowly in the oil till a golden brown, place on
kitchen paper and sprinkle with salt. Allow these to get cold. Drain
the rest of the nuts, and pound them in a mortar till quite fine, add
the egg and butter, and season well. Pound all together till quite
smooth, then pile up on the rounds of bread, and arrange 3 of the
salted almonds on each.


=127. Frittamix Rissoles.=

Take 1/2-lb. of frittamix (Mapleton's), 2-ozs. of fine stale breadcrumbs
and 1-oz. of butter. Mix all together with some boiling water and make
into rissoles or sausages, egg and breadcrumb them and fry crisp in
boiling Nutter.


=128. Marmite Toast.=

(A good breakfast dish).

Spread some Marmite on rounds of white bread, fry till they are crisp,
and serve with scrambled eggs piled on each round, or piled in a dish
with fried eggs.


=129. Salted Almonds.=

Heat a dessertspoonful of butter in a frying pan till it smokes, place
some blanched almonds in it, sprinkle lightly with salt and pepper, or
red pepper if liked, shake the pan till the almonds are _slightly_
brown, place on paper to drain, and serve.


=130. Chestnut Stew.=

Take 1-lb. chestnuts, 1-1/2-ozs. oil or butter, 1 tablespoonful flour, 1
pt. milk, 1 yolk of egg, 1 tablespoonful of chopped parsley. Add
pepper and salt. Boil the chestnuts for 1/4-hour, then place in hot oven
for 5 minutes, when the skins will be easy to remove. Put the oil into
a saucepan and in it fry the chestnuts for a few minutes, stir in 1
tablespoonful of flour, add the milk gradually with pepper and salt,
and let the whole simmer gently for half an hour. Just before serving,
add the parsley chopped fine. The yolk of an egg may also be added to
give greater richness, but in this case do not let it boil again. This
dish is both nutritious and tasty.




=COLD LUNCHEON DISHES=

(For Hot Luncheon Dishes see previous section of Recipes).


=131. Oeufs Farcie en Aspic.=

Boil 4 eggs hard and remove the shells, and take out the yolks; beat
them in a bowl, and then add 2 teaspoons of salad oil and a little
chopped parsley and thyme, a few breadcrumbs, pepper and salt. Mix all
well and fill in each white half, even over with a knife, and glaze.
Serve with Salad and Mayonnaise sauce.


=132. Nut Galantine.=

Take 1/2-lb. ground walnuts, 1/4-lb. cooked spaghetti, 2 onions, 1 small
tomato, 1-oz. butter, 1 dessertspoonful of Carnos, a little stock,
pepper and salt to taste. Fry the onions and tomato in the butter, and
then add the other ingredients and simmer for 15 minutes. Put into a
greased mould, cover with a greased paper, and bake in a slow oven for
1 hour. Turn out when cold and serve with salad and Mayonnaise sauce.
This dish may be served hot as a roast with red currant jelly and
browned potatoes.


=133. Galantine alla Bolognese.=

Steam 1/2-pint of rice, fry 12 mushrooms and 6 small onions, add 1/2-pint
breadcrumbs, and put all through the sausage mill; add 2 well beaten
eggs, pepper and salt, and a pinch of mixed spice. Put the mixture in
buttered paper and shape it like a bolster, fastening the ends with
white of egg. Tie it in a cloth and steam for 1-1/2 hours, then take it
off the fire and leave it to cool. Before serving take off the paper,
then glaze with aspic. Decorate with chopped hard-boiled eggs, or
beetroot and carrot cut in shapes; and serve with chutney or salad
sauce.


=134. Aspic Jelly.=

Take 2 pints of cold water, 1/4-oz. agar-agar (vegetable gelatine), 1
lemon, some pepper and salt, a pinch of cayenne, and 2 tablespoons of
Tarragon vinegar. Soak the agar 2 hours in 1-pt. of the water, then
add the other ingredients, with some Worcester sauce to darken it, add
the white of an egg and the shell, put over a slow fire till the agar
is dissolved, then boil 2 or 3 minutes, and strain through a coarse
flannel.


=135. Mock Lobster Shapes.=

Put the yolks of 4 hard-boiled eggs through a sieve, add by degrees 4
tablespoonfuls of salad oil. When a perfectly smooth paste is formed;
add 1 teaspoonful of Tarragon vinegar, 1 teaspoonful of malt vinegar,
1 gill of cool jelly, 1 gill cream. Have ready about 3-ozs. boiled
haricot beans, chop them coarsely and add to the mixture, put into
small moulds. When set, turn out and glaze.


=136. Raised Pie.=

Line a pie-mould with good short crust, then fill with the following
mixture:--Omelette made with 2 eggs, 2-ozs. chopped macaroni, a little
grated onion, chopped parsley, pepper and salt; 5 or 6 tomatoes peeled
and fried in a little butter, seasoned with a pinch of sugar, pepper
and salt, and thickened with 2 eggs scrambled in them. Leave these
till cold, fit into the pie; cover, brush with egg, and bake in a good
hot oven at first, then slowly for about an hour. Garnish with parsley
and serve cold or hot.


=137. Green Pea Galantine.=

Pass 1 pint of green peas (cooked) through a sieve, add 1 small grated
onion, some chopped mint, 1/4-lb. pine kernel nut-meat (first passing it
through a mill), 2-ozs. tapioca, which has been soaked overnight in
cold water, pepper and salt, and 1/4-lb. breadcrumbs. Mix well and add 1
raw egg. Put into a greased mould or pie dish and bake in a slow oven
3/4 of an hour. Turn out when cold and serve with salad.


=138. Picnic Brawn.=

Fry 1 onion, 1 lump of sugar, in a little butter till quite brown, add
2 tablespoonfuls of Marmite, 3/4-pint of water. Dissolve 1/2-oz. of
gelatine in a little water and add to the gravy. Simmer all together
for 15 minutes and strain, then add some cooked cold vegetables, a
little cooked macaroni, and 1 hard-boiled egg chopped finely. Pepper
and salt to taste, wet a mould with cold water and pour the mixture in
to set. Turn out when cold and quite firm. Decorate with carrots,
etc., cut into shape, and a white paper frill.


=139. Tomato Galantine.=

Six peeled tomatoes, 3 tablespoons of cooked macaroni, 3 onions
chopped and fried, 1/2-cup tapioca (soaked in cold water), nearly a cup
of bread which has been soaked in cold water, drained and fried in the
pan after the onions; mix all with 1 unbeaten egg, pour into a greased
mould which is decorated with hard-boiled egg, cover with greased
paper and bake in a slow oven till set. Eat cold with salad.


=140. Nut-Meat Galantine.=

Take 1/2-lb. Protose, 1/4-lb. spaghetti (cooked), 8 large chestnuts
(boiled and peeled), and 2 onions fried; put these through a sausage
machine and add 1/2-cupful of tapioca which has been soaked in cold
water, 1-oz. of butter broken into small pieces, and pepper and salt
to taste. Mix well, then put into a greased mould. Cover with greased
paper, and bake in a slow oven 1 hour. Turn out when cold and serve
with salad and mayonnaise.


=141. Tomato Mayonnaise.=

Peel and slice 6 good tomatoes, place them in a dish and cover them
with Mayonnaise sauce; let them stand for a few hours. Serve after
sprinkling some finely chopped parsley over the top. This dish tastes
nice with Protose rolls, or cheese, &c.


=142. Nut-Meat Rolls.=

Prepare pastry as usual for sausage rolls, either short or puffy. The
filling mixture is made just as for the Nut-Meat Rissoles (52), with
the addition of a few breadcrumbs. Roll the mixture between the
fingers into the shape of a sausage, and proceed just as usual. Brush
with egg and bake in a quick oven.


=143. Protose Luncheon Rolls.=

Break up with a fork 1/2-lb. of Protose, add to this some chopped
parsley, 2 peeled tomatoes, crumbs, pepper and salt, and a few drops
of A1 sauce. Mix thoroughly. Have ready some short pastry, cut into
squares, place a little of the mixture in each, fold in the usual way.
Brush over with egg and bake in a quick oven.


=144. Potted White Haricots.=

(A Substitute for Potted Chicken.)

Stew a cupful of white haricots with 6 onions and water to cover them,
until perfectly soft. Rub through a wire sieve or potato masher. Add
3-ozs. of mashed potato, 6-ozs. of brown breadcrumbs, 1-oz. of butter,
1-oz. grated cheese, and an eggspoonful of mustard. Mix well with
pestle and mortar and fill small pots, cover with melted butter.


=145. Potted Lentil Savoury.=

Take 1/4-lb. lentils (cooked), 3-ozs. mashed potato, 2-ozs. breadcrumbs,
1 egg (beaten), chopped parsley, a little onion juice, salt and
pepper, and 1-oz. butter. Put all in a pan and mix well together, with
2-ozs. of grated cheese, stirring all the time. When cooked, turn into
a mortar, pound well and press into potting dishes and melt butter
over the top. This makes excellent sandwiches with a little mustard
spread on it.


=146. Nut Sandwiches.=

Flake some Brazil or other nuts and spread a thin layer in some bread
and butter sandwiches which have been dressed with honey or jam.
Almonds can be used if preferred, and curry powder instead of
preserve, if they are preferred savoury instead of sweet.


=147. Tomato or Egg Sandwiches.=

Make sandwiches by spreading tomato paste between slices of bread and
butter. A dish of mustard and cress sandwiches should be served with
them. Sieved hard-boiled eggs, with a pinch of herbs, make good
sandwiches also.


=148. Egg and Cress Sandwiches.=

Take some eggs, boiled hard; chop very fine and place between some
rounds of white bread, spread a little Mayonnaise sauce on them and a
layer of chopped cress. The rounds of bread should be cut out with a
cutter. Pile the sandwiches on a dish and decorate with parsley, and a
little chopped yolk of the eggs.


=149. Cabbage Salad.=

Two eggs well beaten, 6 tablespoonfuls of cream, 1/2-teaspoon of salt, 6
teaspoons of vinegar, and a small piece of butter. Put on the fire and
cook, stirring continually until quite thick. Prepare a half head of
cabbage chopped fine, sprinkled with salt. Add to the dressing when
cold 2 tablespoonfuls of cream, and pour over the cabbage.


=150. Potted Haricot Savoury.=

Put a good breakfastcupful of brown beans, with a few onions, into a
brown stew-jar, and cover with a quart, or rather more, of water.
Place in a slow oven and cook until the beans crack, and the liquid
will then have become a rich brown colour. After the liquid has been
poured from the beans (to be used as stock or for haricot tea) rub
them through a sieve or masher. To 7-ozs. of the pulp, add 3-ozs.
mashed potato, 3-ozs. brown breadcrumbs, and 1-1/2-ozs. butter; salt,
pepper, nutmeg and mace to taste, and a little fried onion if liked.
Put all in a pan and stir till hot, add 1 beaten egg, and cook until
the mixture leaves the sides of the pan, but do not let it get too
stiff. Press into potting dishes as usual.


=151. Cheese and Tomato Paste.=

Take 1/2-lb. Cheddar cheese, flake it, then take 2 good sized tomatoes,
peel them by placing them in hot water for a few minutes. Put the
tomatoes into a basin, chop and beat them into a pulp, add pepper and
a little chopped parsley, mint, and thyme. Mix the tomato pulp with
the grated cheese and beat well together until a paste is produced.
Press into small soufflé dishes.


=152. Potted Haricot Meat.=

Stew some brown haricot beans for several hours (saving the liquor for
stock). Pass them through a sieve, mix with them some brown
breadcrumbs, a finely chopped raw onion, parsley, a little thyme and a
1/4-oz. of butter; pepper and salt to taste. Heat all together in a
saucepan for 10 minutes; pour into jars, and cover with melted butter.
This is a useful dish for breakfast, supper, or when travelling.


=153. Savoury Protose Pudding.=

Make a good stuffing of 1-lb. wholemeal breadcrumbs, sweet herbs,
1/4-lb. butter, chopped parsley, peel of 1 lemon, chopped fine, and
pepper and salt to taste. Bind with 2 or 3 eggs. Thickly line a
well-greased pie dish with the stuffing, then press into the middle a
tin of Protose (minced or machined). Thickly cover over with stuffing.
Put little pieces of butter or nucoline on top, cover with a tin and
bake in slow oven an hour or an hour and a half. This makes a savoury
dish, when cold, with a good salad.


=154. Potted Tomato Paste.=

Three tomatoes, 1 egg, 2-ozs. grated cheese, 4-ozs. breadcrumbs, 1/2-oz.
butter, 1 small onion minced fine, pepper and celery salt. Peel the
tomatoes and cut them up in a small saucepan with the butter and
onion; when tender, mash smoothly and add the egg. Stir quickly until
it becomes thick; add the cheese and breadcrumbs last, when off the
fire. Turn into a pot and cover with butter.


=155. Delicious Milk Cheese.=

Make 1 gallon of rich milk just lukewarm, add the juice of 3 lemons,
or 2 tablespoons of French Wine Vinegar, and stir well. Set aside till
curd and whey are separated; now pour into a cheese cloth with a basin
underneath to catch the whey. Let it hang (after tying up) until well
drained, then place between two plates, or in a flat colander, with a
weight on top, or in a cheese press, until firmly set.


=156. A Good Salad Dressing.=

Rub an eggspoonful of mustard, salt and sugar in a teaspoonful of
olive oil and cream, until the mixture is quite smooth. Then rub the
yolk of a hard-boiled egg in the paste, and keep it free from lumps.
Pour in a dessertspoonful of vinegar, stirring slowly all the time.
Add a teacupful of rich milk or some cream. Serve.




=GRAVIES AND SAUCES.=


A great variety of savoury and nutritious gravies can be made from
vegetable stock, with the usual thickening, (arrowroot is best), a
pinch of salt and pepper, seasoning, and a lump of butter. Brown
haricot broth is the best stock (Recipe 5). The addition of Nutril,
Wintox, Mapleton's Gravy Essence, or Marmite gives flavour and
increases the nourishing quality.

It is very desirable that the gravy or sauce served with certain
vegetarian dishes should be piquante in taste and of a nice flavour.
It is worth while to take some trouble to achieve this result, because
many dishes that are plain and perhaps somewhat tasteless in
themselves are made quite savoury and enjoyable by the addition of a
piquante dressing. Brand's A1 sauce is a good example of such
piquancy, and is also useful in making sauces in the home, as a few
teaspoons of it will often give an unique flavour to a simple gravy
that is lacking in this respect.


=157. Walnut Gravy.=

Take about 4-ozs. of shelled walnuts, put them through the nut mill,
and place in a small pan in which you have previously made hot 1-oz.
of butter. Fry until the walnut is dark brown, _stirring well_ all the
time to prevent burning. Pour on a pint of stock, or water if no stock
is at hand, and let it simmer slowly until just before serving. Then
add 1-oz. of flour to thicken, some seasoning, and a few drops of
onion or some tomato sauce. This makes a most rich and savoury
gravy--especially if a little nut-butter is added.


=158. Curry Gravy.=

In the cold weather, dishes which contain curry are seasonable and are
generally appreciated. The following recipe for a curry gravy will
prove useful to many readers, as it makes a capital addition to plain
boiled rice or many other dishes. Fry 2 onions, minced in some butter
until they are quite brown. Then sift in some flour and let it brown
also. Add slowly some vegetable stock or water, two minced apples, a
teaspoonful of curry paste (Stembridge's is good), a teaspoonful of
vinegar, and a dessertspoonful each of tomato sauce and chutney. Stir
and serve.


=159. Gravy Piquante.=

Stew a dozen shallots in some butter until soft. Stir in some flour
and let it brown; add the juice of a lemon, 1/4-pint of water, a clove,
a teaspoonful of sugar, and a pinch of salt and pepper. Boil gently
for a few minutes and stir in a little more flour; add 1/2-pt. of clear
stock or water, boil for 15 minutes and strain.


=160. Plain Brown Gravy.=

Melt some butter until brown, add flour (previously mixed well in a
little water), and some vegetable stock, dilute if necessary and
strain. A fried onion and tomato, and a teaspoonful of Nutter adds to
the flavour and richness. The addition of Vegeton, Nutril or Marmite
improves this.


=161. Sauce Piquante.=

Take equal quantities of vegetable stock and Tomate à la Vatel
(Dandicolle and Gaudin), fry a chopped onion brown, add the above,
thicken with arrowroot, boil and strain.


=162. Rich Brown Gravy.=

Melt 1 oz. butter or nutter in a small saucepan, then add nearly a
tablespoonful of flour, and keep stirring until you get a rich dark
brown, being careful not to burn; now add slowly some stock made by
stewing brown haricot beans, and simmer slowly for about 20 minutes.
At serving time, add a good teaspoonful of Nutril, Wintox or Marmite.


=163. Tarragon Sauce.=

Melt 1-oz. of butter, stir in 1/2-oz. of flour until free from lumps,
add 1/4-pt. of milk and stir until it boils. Finally add 20 or 30 drops
of Tarragon vinegar. This sauce is an excellent addition to
cauliflower, and the flavour is unique.


=164. Parsley Sauce.=

Make in same way as in the above recipe, but substitute a large
teaspoonful of finely chopped parsley for the vinegar.


=165. Tomato Sauce.=

Fry a sliced onion in butter until brown, add 6 sliced tomatoes, a
clove of garlic and 1/2-oz. more butter. Heat until quite soft, add
1/2-pt. of clear vegetable stock or water, strain and serve. Thicken
with arrowroot if desired.


=166. Sauce Hollandaise.=

Take 3-ozs. of butter, the juice of a lemon, the yolks of 3 eggs, and
a teaspoonful of flour. Heat in a double saucepan while being stirred,
until it begins to thicken. This is a good sauce to serve with
cauliflower, asparagus, artichokes, etc.


=167. White Sauce.=

Make in the same manner as Tarragon Sauce, but omit the vinegar and
add 1/4-pt. of water.


=168. Mayonnaise Sauce.=

Mix a teaspoonful of mustard with the yolk of an egg, add 4
tablespoons of pure olive oil, a few drops at a time, beating it with
a fork; add 2-ozs. of castor sugar, some pepper and salt, the juice of
a large lemon and 2 teaspoons of Tarragon vinegar. Whisk the white of
the egg with 1/4-pint of cream, and beat all together.


=169. Tomato Chutney.=

One and a half pounds of tomatoes, 1-3/4-lb. apples, 1-1/2-lb. sultanas,
1-1/2-lb. brown sugar, 2-ozs. onions, 4-ozs. salt, 3/4-oz. cayenne pepper,
3-pts. vinegar. The whole to be boiled for 3 hours. Pour into
stoppered bottles. This makes a most excellent chutney.


=170. Coconut Sauce.=

Melt 1-oz. of butter in a pan, stir in 1-oz. of flour smoothly, then
add 1/2-pt. of cold water and 1/2-pt. of milk, half at a time; stir in
1/2-oz. of desiccated coconut and 1/2-oz. of sugar, and bring to the boil.
Mapleton's Coconut Cream is superior to butter.


=171. Marmite Savoury Gravy.=

Chop an onion, and put it into 1-pt. of boiling water with a teaspoon
of butter and a dessertspoon of dried sage; boil until the onion is
soft; add two teaspoons of Marmite, season with pepper and salt, and
thicken with a small teacupful of arrowroot or cornflour. Strain and
serve.


=172. Marmite Glaze.=

Dissolve two teaspoons of Marmite in 1/2-pt. of boiling water, strain
through a fine hair sieve or a piece of muslin into an enamel
saucepan, put in 2-ozs. of gelatine, place on the fire and dissolve.


=173. Quick Lunch Gravy.=

Put a teaspoon of Marmite into a pint of boiling water, season with
pepper and salt, thicken with a little browned flour.


=174. Thick Brown Sauce.=

Fry 1 onion, 1 lump of sugar, and a little butter until quite brown,
add 2 teaspoons of brown flour and 1/2-pt. vegetable stock, pepper and
salt to taste, boil well, and strain.


=175. Carnos Sauce.=

A Sauce can be quickly made with a spoonful of Carnos, thickened with
flour, and flavoured to taste, with onion, tomato, or celery, etc.


=176. Cheese Sauce.=

Place 1/2-pt. of milk in a pan, and add a teaspoon of cornflour. Boil up
and beat in 3-ozs. of grated cheese after removing from fire.


=177. Fruit Sauce.=

Take 1-oz. of cornflour, mix with a little water, adding 1/2-pt. of
cherry, pineapple, or other fruit syrup, and boil until it thickens.




=PUDDINGS AND SWEETS.=


=178. Christmas Pudding.=

Mix 1-lb. breadcrumbs, 1-lb. flour, 1-lb. sultanas or currants, 2-lbs.
raisins, 1/4-lb. mixed peel, 1/2-lb. sugar, 1/2-lb. Nutter ((or Vegsu),
flaked in the nut mill), 1/2-lb. chopped pine kernels. Add nutmeg to
taste, and five or six eggs. Boil for 12 hours, and serve with sauce
as usual. This pudding wins approbation from all who try it.

N.B.--All boiled puddings should be allowed ample room to swell during
cooking. If too closely confined they are sometimes prevented from
being light.

[Illustration]


=179. A Simple Plum Pudding.=

Mix 1/2-lb. flour, 1-lb. raisins or sultanas, 6-ozs. Nutter and 1-oz.
mixed peel. Add 1 teaspoonful of mixed spice, 2 eggs, and a little
milk if required. Boil for at least 6 hours, serve with sweet sauce.


=180. A Fruit Salad.=

By the _Chef_ of the Canton Hotel.

Peaches, apricots, cherries, grapes, black and red currants,
pineapples, bananas. The peaches and apricots are peeled and
quartered, the cherries stoned, the bananas and pineapples cut in
slices or dice. Mix, cover with powdered sugar, a glass of kirsch, and
a glass of maraschino, and lay on ice until required.


=181. Rich Plum Pudding.=

Take 1/2-lb. stoned raisins, 1/2-lb. sultanas, 2-ozs. mixed peel, 1/4-lb.
sugar, 4-ozs. breadcrumbs, 1/2-lb. chopped apples, 2-ozs. Nutter, 2-ozs.
pine kernels, 6 sweet almonds, 6 Brazil nuts, 1/2 nutmeg, 2 teaspoons of
mixed spice, 1 teaspoon of ginger, a few drops of ratafia flavouring
essence, and 3 eggs. Finely chop all the fruit and the pine kernels,
and put the nuts and peel through the mill. Rub the Nutter into the
breadcrumbs and mix in the other ingredients and finally the eggs, one
at a time (stirring well). Put into basins and boil 12 hours, then set
aside till wanted. Boil them again for 2 or 3 hours before serving.


=182. Sultana and Ginger Pudding.=

Thoroughly mix 7-ozs. breadcrumbs, 1 oz. of flour, 8-ozs. sultanas,
3-ozs. sugar, and one good teaspoonful of ground ginger. Rub in 1-oz.
butter and then stir in gradually 3 gills of milk and water (mixed),
and lastly put in a small teaspoonful of carbonate of soda. Stir well,
pour into a buttered mould and steam for three hours.

Chopped figs, French plums or dates can be substituted for the
sultanas, and thus the pudding can be made in various ways.


=183. Plain Sultana Pudding.=

Mix in a basin 7-ozs. breadcrumbs, 1-oz. flour, 6-ozs. sultanas,
3-ozs. sugar, and 1-oz. butter. Moisten with 3/4-pint of milk and water,
to which has been added 1 small teaspoon of bicarbonate of soda. Steam
for 3 hours, and serve with sweet sauce. This pudding is much
appreciated by children.


=184. Jellied Figs.=

Stew 1/2-lb. of figs in 1-pt. of water for 2 or 3 hours till quite
tender. Dissolve 1/2-oz. of gelatine in 1/2-pt. of water over a gentle
heat and strain it on to the figs after they have been cut into small
pieces and the juice of half a lemon added; stir well and turn into a
wetted mould. Turn out when cold and sprinkle a little ground almond
or coconut over it. Serve plain or with cream.


=185. Creamed Rice Moulds.=

Put 3-ozs. of rice into a saucepan with 1-1/2-pts. of cold milk, bring
to the boil, then stand over a gentle heat till quite tender, stirring
occasionally to keep it from burning. Add vanilla, 1-oz. of sugar and
1/4-pt. of cream, mix well and pour into wetted moulds. Serve garnished
with raspberry or other jam.


=186. Ambrosia.=

Pare 5 oranges, removing all the tough white skin, cut through twice
and slice them. Take a cup of grated coconut and moisten with cream.
Fill a glass bowl with alternate layers of orange and coconut, finish
with orange and cover with a thick layer of whipped cream, sprinkle
with ground almonds, and decorate with candied fruit.


=187. Bread Pudding.=

Any piece of stale bread or cake, 3-ozs. sultanas, 3-ozs. currants, a
little peel and spice, 1 egg, and sugar to taste. Soak the bread by
pouring some boiling milk over it, beat it up very well, then add the
fruit, etc., and bake or boil for 2 hours.


=188. Semolina Moulds.=

Cook 3-ozs. of semolina in 1-1/2-pts of milk for three-quarters of an
hour, stirring well, flavour with sugar and vanilla or lemon essence,
and pour into wetted moulds. Serve with preserve garnishing.


=189. Castle Puddings.=

The weight of 2 eggs in butter and sugar, the weight of 3 eggs in
flour and a little grated lemon rind. Cream the butter and sugar
together, add the eggs well beaten and lemon rind. Mix well and stir
in the flour, half fill the pudding moulds with the mixture and bake
for 20 minutes. Serve with a jam sauce.


=190. Strawberry Cream.=

Half-pound strawberries, 3-ozs. castor sugar, 1 gill cream, 1/2-oz.
gelatine, 2 eggs. Mash the strawberries to a pulp with the sugar, then
add the cream, the yolks of eggs, and gelatine (dissolved in a little
water) and cook over a saucepan of boiling water for 15 minutes,
stirring all the time. Whip the whites of egg to a stiff froth and add
to the mixture and cook for a few minutes more, then pour into a
buttered mould, and turn out when stiff.


=191. Marmalade Pudding.=

Three-ozs. nut-margarine, 3-ozs. castor sugar, 2 tablespoons
marmalade, 2 eggs, 6-ozs. flour. Beat the butter and sugar to a cream,
then add the eggs and marmalade and beat well for 10 minutes, then
stir in the flour very lightly, and put in a greased basin, cover with
a greased paper and steam for 2 hours. Serve with sweet sauce.


=192. Small Cakes.=

Three-ozs. nut-margarine, 3-ozs. castor sugar, 2 eggs, 5-ozs. flour.
Cream the butter and sugar together and add the eggs well beaten and
stir the flour in lightly, mix well and put in a shallow tin and bake
for 20 minutes. When cold cut in small shapes and ice.


=193. Stewed Prunes à la Francaise.=

Put the prunes in a basin of water and leave to soak for 12 hours,
then stew gently in a double saucepan in the same water (with a slice
of lemon peel) until it forms into a thick juice. Serve with whipped
cream or boiled rice, etc.


=194. Custard Moulds.=

Boil 1-pt. milk with 1 tablespoonful sugar and 1 bay leaf; add 1/2-oz.
gelatine. Stir till dissolved, and remove from the fire for a minute
or two. Strain this on to 1 egg well beaten, return to pan, and stir
over the fire until it thickens, but do not let it boil. Whisk well
occasionally while cooling, and just before it sets pour into wetted
moulds.


=195. Bakewell Pudding.=

Line a pie dish with puff paste, and spread on it a layer of apricot
jam. Put the yolks of 2 eggs into a basin with the white of 1 and beat
well together. Then add 3-ozs. of sugar, 2-ozs. butter dissolved, and
1/2-oz. of ground almonds. Mix all well together and pour over the jam;
bake half-an-hour.


=196. Vanilla Creams.=

Dissolve 1/2-oz. of gelatine in 3 gills of milk, and flavour with 1-oz.
of sugar and 1 teaspoonful of vanilla essence. Strain it on to 1/4-pt.
of cream, and when just beginning to set, whisk well and stir in
lightly the white of an egg beaten till quite stiff. Turn into wetted
moulds and leave till set.


=197. Lemon Creams.=

Dissolve 1/2-oz. of gelatine in 1/2-pt. of water, with 2-ozs. of sugar and
the grated rind and juice of a lemon. When nearly cold strain this on
to 1 gill of milk and 1 gill of cream, whisk well and stir in lightly
the stiff-beaten white of an egg. Pour into moulds and leave till set.


=198. Lemon Semolina Pudding.=

Put three tablespoonfuls semolina in a saucepan with 1-1/2-pts. milk.
Bring to the boil, then simmer slowly till quite swollen. Set aside to
cool a little, then add 2-ozs. sugar, the grated rind and half the
juice of a lemon, also a well-beaten egg. Stir well and pour into a
buttered pie-dish, and bake slowly till set. Turn out and garnish with
jam.


=199. Raspberry Pudding.=

Stew 1-lb. of raspberries (or more) with some sugar. Line a basin with
some slices of bread (without crust). Pour in half the fruit, cover
with a layer of bread, then add the remainder of the raspberries and
another layer of bread. Press down with a saucer and place a weight on
it. Turn out and serve when cold with cream or Plasmon snow-cream.


=200. Rice à la Reine.=

Cook 3-ozs. rice in 1-qt. milk for 2 or 3 hours, sweeten and flavour
to taste. When cooled a little add 1/2-oz. gelatine dissolved in
1/2-a-teacup of milk and strained, and 1 gill of cream; stir well and
pour into a wetted mould.


=201. Apple Custard.=

Place some biscuit crumbs in a buttered pie dish. Nearly fill it with
stewed apples. Beat an egg with 1/4-pt. of milk and pour over the
apples. Place some small ratafia biscuits on the top and some grated
nutmeg. Bake in a moderate oven.


=202. Sultana Custard Pudding.=

To 2-ozs. of Robinson's Patent Barley, add 1-oz. of sifted sugar,
1/2-oz. of butter, a pinch of salt, and nearly 1-pt. of milk; mix
thoroughly and stir it over the fire till it boils; then add a yolk
of egg, 3-ozs. sultanas, and bake the pudding in a buttered pie-dish.


=203. Swiss Roll.=

Take 3-ozs. castor sugar and 1 teacupful flour, and add to them 1
teaspoonful of baking powder. Separate the yolks from the whites of 2
eggs, and beat the latter till stiff. Add 1 tablespoon of milk to the
yolks, and work into the flour and sugar, then add the stiffly beaten
whites. Beat all well with a wooden spoon. Pour on to a greased
Yorkshire pudding tin, and bake in a very sharp oven for seven
minutes. Then turn on to a piece of kitchen paper dredged with castor
sugar. Spread quickly with jam (which has been thoroughly beaten) and
roll with the paper. Place on a sieve till cool.


=204. Gateau aux Fruits.=

Take half a tinned pineapple, 3 bananas, 1/4-lb. grapes, 4 Tangarine
oranges, and the juice of a lemon. Cut up the fruit into dice,
sprinkle with sugar and pour over them half the pineapple syrup, the
lemon juice, and a tablespoonful of maraschino, and leave for an hour
to soak. Split five stale sponge cakes open, cut each half into three
fingers and spread each rather thickly with apricot jam. Place four of
these strips on a glass dish so as to form a square, and put four more
across the corners so as to form a diamond in it, and so on, square
and diamond alternately. Fill the middle of the tower thus formed with
the macedoine of fruits, piling them high above the top, and pour the
rest of the pineapple syrup over the cake. Whip half a pint of cream
stiffly, and put it (or Coconut Cream, 224) on in rough spoonfuls all
over the tower.


=205. Poached Apricots.=

Upon some slices of sponge cake, place half an apricot (round side
uppermost). Whip some white of egg to a snow frost with castor sugar.
Place this round the apricot so as to make it resemble a poached egg.
Whipped cream is preferable to many persons if obtainable. The sponge
should be slightly moistened with the apricot juice.


=206. Lemon Sponge.=

Dissolve 1/2-oz. of leaf gelatine in 1/2-pt. of water and add the rind of
a lemon and 1-oz. castor sugar. Strain the juice of a lemon on to the
white of an egg, then strain the dissolved gelatine on to it. Whisk
all together till it makes quite a stiff froth. Turn into a mould, and
take out when set.


=207. Plasmon Snow-Cream.=

Put 3 heaped teaspoonfuls (1-3/4-ozs.) of Plasmon into a bowl. From
1/2-pt. of tepid water take 4 tablespoons and mix it with the powder,
rubbing it into a paste. Slowly add the remainder of the water; stir
thoroughly, then place in a saucepan and bring to the boil, stirring
all the time. Stand aside to get quite cold. When required for use,
whisk it into a thick snow-cream. This makes a splendid addition to
stewed fruit (peaches, &c.), cocoa, coffee, or puddings. It is most
nutritious also. The proportions must be correct to get the cream
_firm_ as well as _light_. If it is _frothy_ there is too much water;
if sticky and heavy there is not sufficient water.


=208. Rice and Sultana Padding.=

To an ordinary rice pudding add 4-ozs. of sultanas. Bake in a slow
oven for several hours, with plenty of milk. When cooked it should be
brown in colour and quite moist. It is easily digested and makes a
good supper dish.


=209. Plain Boiled Pudding.=

Take 2-ozs. of Nutter, 4-ozs. each of white and brown flour, and
4-ozs. of breadcrumbs. Add water gradually, mixing into a dry dough,
and boil in a cloth for an hour and a half.


=210. Apple Fritters.=

Peel and quarter, or finely mince, some good cooking apples, dip in
batter made as follows:--1 tablespoonful flour, 1 egg well beaten,
enough milk to make it the consistency of cream. Fry crisp, and
serve.


=211. Empress Pudding.=

Take 1-pt. of breadcrumbs, 1-qt. of new milk, the yolks of 4 eggs
(well beaten), the grated rind of a lemon, and 3-ozs. of butter; mix
and bake about half an hour. When cold, spread some raspberry or plum
jam over the pudding, then whip the whites of the eggs with a teacup
of sifted sugar and the juice of a lemon, and lay this over the jam.
Make slightly brown in the oven.


=212. Orange Jelly.=

Wipe and thickly peel 5 oranges and 2 lemons, take 1-pt. of cold
water, 1/2-lb. white sugar, and 1-1/2-ozs. cornflour. Place the peel and
water in a pan and simmer for 20 minutes with the sugar; strain the
resulting juice. Place the cornflour in a basin and squeeze the juice
of the fruit through a strainer on to it, then pour the boiling syrup
on to this mixture; stir well, return to saucepan, and boil for 6
minutes. Pour out into cold wet mould. Garnish with orange.


=213. Ginger Pudding.=

Take 6-ozs. of brown breadcrumbs (finely grated), 3-ozs. of butter, a
saltspoonful of ground ginger, the juice of a lemon, and 4-ozs. of
castor sugar. Stir these in a stewpan until the butter is melted. Chop
4-ozs. of preserved ginger and add to the mixture with the yolks of 2
eggs. Beat well together and set aside to cool. Whisk the whites of
the eggs and stir into the pudding quickly. Fill a buttered basin with
it, cover with a saucer (leaving room to swell) and steam for 3 hours.
Serve with cream or fruit sauce (177).


=214. Baked Coconut Custard.=

Beat 3 eggs and mix with 1-1/2-pts. of milk, add 2 tablespoons of
desiccated coconut, and a tablespoonful of sugar. Bake in a slow oven,
and add some grated nutmeg.


=215. Semolina Pudding.=

Boil a teacupful of semolina for 15 minutes in 2-1/2 pts. of milk,
stirring all the time. Flavour with vanilla. Turn out into a buttered
pie dish, garnish with ratafia biscuits and bake in a moderate oven.


=216. Strawberry Cream Ice.=

Take 1-1/2-lbs. of ripe strawberries, 6-ozs. of castor sugar, 1/2-lb. of
cream and a teacupful of milk. Put the strawberries through a sieve or
strainer, mix the whole well together, and freeze.

Raspberry ice can be made in a simpler form by reducing the cream by
one-half and by adding another teacupful of milk in which a
dessertspoonful of cornflour has been boiled.


=217. Vanilla Ice.=

Take 1 pint of milk, 1 gill of cream, the yolks of 3 eggs, and 3-ozs.
of castor sugar. After heating the milk, mix 1/2-oz. of ground rice with
a little cold milk and put it in the saucepan. Pour in the beaten
yolks and cream, and the sugar; stir and simmer until the custard
thickens, strain and set aside to cool; add vanilla to taste, and stir
well; place in the freezing machine. To make this ice taste richer and
more delicate, reduce the milk and increase the cream.


=218. Lemon Cheese-Cakes.=

Put in a saucepan 1/4-lb. butter, 1-lb. lump sugar, 6 eggs (leaving out
2 whites), 2 grated lemon rinds, and the juice of 3 lemons. Simmer
until all is dissolved (gently stirring), and add a few dry biscuit
crumbs. Serve on crisp pastry.


=219. Lemon Jelly.=

Dissolve 1-oz. of isinglass in 1-1/4-pts. of water. Add the grated peel
of 2 lemons and 1/2-lb. of lump sugar. Boil for 10 minutes, stirring
continually. Take off fire and add the juice of 1-1/2 lemons. Strain and
cool. Whisk well before turning into moulds.


=220. Fruitarian Mincemeat.=

Take 7-ozs. Nutter, 12-ozs. raisins, 6-ozs. sultanas, 6-ozs. currants,
1/4-lb. Demerara sugar, 1-1/2-lbs. apples, 1/4-lb. mixed candied peel, the
rind and juice of 1 lemon, 6 almonds, 6 Brazil nuts, a few drops
ratafia flavouring essence, and 3 teaspoons of mixed spice. Stone the
rasins, finely chop all the fruit, and put the nuts and almonds
through the nut mill. Now melt the Nutter in a saucepan, and gradually
add all the other ingredients, stirring well, leave standing over
night, and put in pots next morning. Cover closely, and this will keep
a long time.


=221. Short Pastry.=

Rub 1/2-lb. Nutter into 1-lb. flour and 2-ozs. Artox wholemeal, mix as
dry as possible with water, and it is ready to make excellent
biscuits, short cakes, or tart crusts. If whiter pastry is required
use white flour.


=222. Puff Pastry.=

Ingredients:--1-lb. flour, 3/4-lb. Nutter, cold water. Method:--Rub
1/4-lb. Nutter into the flour, mix to a rough dough with cold water,
stand in a cool place for ten minutes. Roll out and "spot" over with
1/4-lb. Nutter broken in small pieces; fold over, roll out and stand 10
minutes. Roll out again and spot over with the remaining 1/4-lb. Nutter;
fold over and roll out, and after standing 10 minutes it is ready for
use.


=223. Chestnut Cream.=

Take from 20 to 30 chestnuts, remove the shells and skins. Put the
chestnuts in a saucepan with 2 teacups full of water, sugar to taste,
the juice of 1 lemon, and simmer slowly until they are quite soft.
Pass through a sieve or potato masher, and when cold pile in a dish,
and cover with whipped cream.


=224. Coconut Cream.=

A nice addition to Trifles, Fruit Salads, etc., can be made by using
Mapleton's Coconut Cream. Mix 2 ozs. of the cream with 1/8-pt. of
boiling water; when softened beat for a minute or so with the
egg-beater, then pour on a dish. In 2 hours it will have set and can
be used to fill sponge sandwiches, or eaten with stewed fruit. To form
a thick cream (less solid) beat up 2-1/2 to 3 ozs. Coconut Cream with
1/4-pt. of hot water.




=THE BREAD PROBLEM.=


Pure wholemeal bread, so made as to be light and well baked, is a
virtual necessity for every abstainer from flesh-food. Food-Reform
presents many difficulties, and every dietetic reformer has to grapple
with them. Insufficient knowledge, defective sources of provision,
digestive troubles, inherited organic weakness, and unfavourable
environment, are only a few of these. I want, therefore to emphasize
the importance of a perfect bread supply, which I am convinced is the
key to the problem so far as many are concerned.

It is not sufficient merely to pray for "our daily bread," and then to
leave its provision entirely to Providence. We need also to _think_
and to take some personal trouble about it--remembering that Heaven
helps those who help themselves. Yet this is what very few people do.
One may safely affirm that four persons out of every five are content
to use defective and innutritious bread every day of their lives. Yet
this should be made a real staff of life.

The whole grain of wheat, if of good quality, contains nearly all that
is needful for the perfect nutrition of the body. With the addition of
a small amount of fat (easily found in nut or dairy butter, cheese or
oil), and of grape sugar and purifying acids (obtainable in fruits),
pure wheatmeal, if properly ground in stone mills, and well made into
delicious home-baked bread, enables one to be almost independent of
other foods, and therefore almost ensures one against a breakdown in
health if there is difficulty in obtaining a varied and well
proportioned dietary from other sources.

Instead of securing and using bread such as this, the majority of the
community complacently eat white bread--emasculated, robbed of its
gluten (which is equivalent to albumen) and of the phosphates and
mineral salts that are stored in the inner part of the husk of the
grain. It is composed almost entirely of starch, with the addition of
such adulterants as the baker or miller feels inclined to introduce
for commercial reasons, and is not conducive to the proper operation
of the digestive and eliminative organs.

It is difficult for bakers or the public to buy really good wholemeal.
The meal that is on the markets often consists of cheap roller-milled
flour with some sweepings of bran or seconds thrown in. And even if
the entire grain is supplied, the outer cuticle of the wheat, when
_rolled_ (in the modern steel-roller mills that for reasons of economy
have superseded the good old-fashioned stone _grinding_ mills),
instead of being so reduced as to be capable of complete digestion, is
left with rough edges called _spiculae_, which irritate the digestive
tract, cause relaxation, and arouse prejudice against the 'brown'
loaf. Such wholemeal cannot be perfectly assimilated because the bran
is not properly broken up, and, in addition to this fact, the
cerealine, which acts like diastase in the conversion of starch into
sugar, is not liberated and rendered available as an aid to
digestion.

That the distasteful and often indigestible brown or wholemeal bread
(so-called) usually sold by bakers is either defective or adulterated,
can easily be proven by anyone. Let any reader procure some
stone-milled entire wheatmeal that is guaranteed pure (I use the
'Artox' and 'Ixion' brands myself, because I believe them to be of
genuine quality and properly stone-ground); then make some thin loaves
as described in the following recipe. The result, if the bread is
skilfully made, will be a delicious and nutritive loaf of the
farmhouse type with a sweet nutty flavour. Instead of quickly getting
'stale,' such a loaf is enjoyable when four days old, and it only
needs to be compared with ordinary bakers' bread to reveal the fact
that it is an entirely different article of food. Its sustaining power
is wonderful, and it proves an effectual preventive of starved nerves
as well as other ailments.


=225. How to make Wholemeal Bread.=

The yeast must be quite fresh, and the bread should be raised in
separate tins _in a warm place or cupboard_; the oven must be hot at
first, but the heat should be much reduced after 10 minutes. Mix
6-lbs. of wholemeal with 1-lb. of household flour. Then mix 3-ozs. of
_fresh_ yeast with a tablespoon of treacle, adding 2 tablespoons of
olive oil when it is quite dissolved. Put this into the flour with
about 2-pts. of lukewarm water. Mix it with a wooden spoon till it
does not stick. Knead for 10 minutes, adding more water if necessary
but keeping the dough firm and spongy. Put it into flat baking tins
(well greased) about 2-1/2 inches deep, covering the tins to the depth
of about 1 inch only. Let it rise for 1 hour, or till it reaches the
tops of the tins. Then bake first in a quick oven, and afterwards in a
slower. A gas oven is most reliable for baking bread, as the heat is
more easily regulated. The bread should be a rich dark golden brown
when well baked.


=226. White Bread.=

Make as Recipe 225, but substitute household flour for wholemeal. The
shape and size of the loaves should be changed occasionally. Loaves
baked in _small_ tins are often lighter than bread made into large
loaves.


=227. Plain Currant Bread and Buns.=

To 2-lbs. of good wholemeal or white flour add a pinch of salt, 1
tablespoonful of sugar, and 1/2-lb. of currants or sultanas; also rub in
2-ozs. of olive oil or nut-margarine. Mix 1-oz. of yeast with a little
golden syrup and add lukewarm water. Stir this into the flour, and add
sufficient warm water to make a nice dough. Shape into loaves or
little buns, set to rise for 1 hour or longer, then bake in a quick
oven and brush with egg and milk.


=228. Dinner Rolls.=

Delicious dinner rolls can be made as follows:--Take 1-lb. of white
flour, 1-lb. of wholemeal, 3-ozs. butter, and 1-oz. of yeast. Mix the
yeast with a dessertspoonful of treacle, 3/4-pt. of milk and water. Rub
the butter into the flour, and put in the yeast to rise. Knead, form
into small rolls, raise for half-an-hour, bake in a quick oven.


=229. Sultana Cake.=

Sift into 1/2-lb. of flour 1 teaspoonful of baking powder. Grate the
rind of a lemon on to an egg and beat it well. Cream together 3-ozs.
nut-margarine and 3-ozs. sugar; add the egg, beating still, then stir
in lightly the flour and 3-ozs. sultanas; add milk to make a soft
dough. Pour into a well-buttered cake tin, put in a hot oven, and bake
for about half-an-hour, reducing the temperature considerably.


=230. Sultana Rice Cake.=

Put 3-ozs. of Nut-margarine in a warm oven. Grate the rind of a lemon
on to an egg and 3-ozs. of castor sugar, beat well, then add the
warmed Nutter and beat again till it is creamy. Now sift together
5-ozs. of ground rice, 3-ozs. of flour and 1 teaspoonful of baking
powder. Beat this gently into the mixture, add 4-ozs. sultanas and
enough milk to make a proper consistency. Put in a hot oven, gradually
reducing the temperature, and bake for about 3/4 of an hour.


=231. Cheese Straws.=

Mix 6-ozs. flour and 6-ozs. grated cheese well together, then rub in
2-ozs. butter, add a little cayenne pepper and salt, bind with the
yolk of an egg, roll out about a quarter of a inch thick, cut into
long narrow fingers, and bake in a sharp oven for 10 minutes.


=232. Sultana Bun Cakes.=

Sift together 8-ozs. of flour, 3-ozs. Paisley flour and 2-ozs. of
sugar; rub in 4-ozs. olive oil, and add 4-ozs. of sultanas. Mix all
with a well beaten egg and a little milk, roll out, shape with a
cutter and bake at once in a quick oven.




=SUMMER AND WINTER DRINKS.=


The following recipes and suggestions concerning a few beverages which
can be used as substitutes for more stimulating drinks may prove
useful to many readers:--


=233. Barley Water.=

Mix a tablespoonful of Pearl Barley with a pint of water and boil for
half-an-hour. Flavour with lemon, cinnamon or sugar, according to
taste, and allow the mixture to cool. For invalids requiring nutriment
a larger quantity of barley should be used.

Barley Water is equally suitable for winter use and can be taken hot.


=234. Wheatenade.=

Simmer 1-lb. of crushed wheat in 1-qt. of water for about an hour,
stirring it occasionally. Strain, add lemon juice and sugar to taste,
for use in summer, or milk and sugar if the drink is taken hot in
winter. Good and clean bran can be substituted for crushed wheat. This
is a capital drink for children with a tendency to rickets, or for
persons suffering from nervous prostration caused by malnutrition.


=235. Oatenade.=

Simmer 1/4-lb. of coarse oatmeal in the same manner as described in the
previous recipe, then flavour to taste. This drink will be slightly
richer in fat than the previous one, and it makes a good winter
drink.


=236. Gingerade.=

Take 1-dr. essence cayenne, 4-drs. essence of ginger, 2-drs. essence
of lemon, 1-dr. burnt sugar, 3/4-oz. of tartaric acid. Add 3-lbs. lump
sugar and 5-qts. boiling water. Bottle ready for use. Dilute to taste.


=237. Fruit Drink.=

Lime juice, if pure, makes a cooling and wholesome drink. The
"Montserrat" is one of the purest brands upon the market; some of the
liquid sold as lime juice is only a chemical concoction. The weaker
the solution the better it tastes. A dessertspoonful to the tumbler is
generally enough. Dole's Pineapple juice is also an excellent fruit
drink.


=238. Rice Water.=

Boil some once-milled rice in water, and add lemon juice and sugar to
taste. The beverage should not be made too thick. As rice is often
used in most households a supply of this nutritious drink is easily
provided. It is very good for children.


=Tea and Coffee Substitutes.=

Those who find tea and coffee undesirable should try "Wallace P. R.
Coffee," "Lifebelt Coffee," "Salfon," or "Horlick's Malted Milk."
Another good substitute is "Hygiama," which, unlike tea and coffee, is
not a stimulant, but a nutrient. On the other hand its effect on the
system is distinctly stimulating in a right and healthy sense. That is
to say, the valuable nourishment which it contains is very easily and
quickly digested and an immediate sense of invigoration is the result.
Unlike cocoa, it is not clogging or constipating or heavy.




=HOW TO FEED INVALIDS.=


In all cases of sickness the patient will have a better chance of
recovery if the diet is light and wisely selected.

[Illustration]

When inflammation and fever exist, fruit and cooling drinks should be
given, and but little nitrogenous food.

An eminent physician writes thus: "The fever patient, like the over
worked man, digests badly. He has no appetite; his salivary glands do
not secrete, or secrete very imperfectly. The gastric juice formed
under bad conditions is almost inert, poor in pepsine and hydrocloric
acid. The liver no longer acts if the fever is high and serious; the
intestinal secretions are partially exhausted.... The fever patient
must then be fed very little."

When the hydrocloric acid is deficient, proteid food should be given
very sparingly--one of the best forms being Casumen in solution (see
224) or white of egg. Milk is not advisable in such a condition,
unless malted, or in the dried form. Fats are objectionable, and if
the salivary secretions are defective, starches should be given in
dextrinized (super-cooked) form, or well toasted. Fruit sugars, which
are Carbohydrates in a digested form, are better still, and may be
given freely to patients of nearly all kinds. They are abundantly
provided in figs, dates, stoneless raisins and sultanas, and in other
sweet fruits, such as bananas, strawberries and apples.

Ample nourishment can be provided by these, supplemented by egg dishes
(chiefly white); flaked and super-cooked cereals, such as Granose
Biscuits, Kellogg Wheat Flakes, Wallace P. R. and Flakit Biscuits,
Archeva Rusks, Melarvi Crisps, and toasted or wholemeal bread; flaked
or malted nuts; legumes soufflé; well-cooked farinaceous puddings;
Horlick's Malted Milk and many other proprietary health-foods; and
vegetable broths--for which see Recipes 1-23, as well as those which
conclude this section on pages 123 and 124.

One of the most important of these latter is 'Haricot Broth,' which is
a perfect substitute for "beef tea," being far more nutritious and
also free from the toxic elements which are contained in that
dangerous and superstitiously venerated compound.

[Sidenote: =The Beef Tea Delusion.=]

Dr. Milner Fothergill stated that probably more invalids have sunk
into their graves through a misplaced confidence in the value of beef
tea than Napoleon killed in all his wars. It is, in reality, a strong
solution of waste products and of uric acid, consisting largely of
excrementitious matter which was in process of elimination from the
system of some animal, through the minute drain pipes which form an
important cleansing medium or "sewage system" in all animal flesh. To
make "beef tea," these poisonous substances are stewed out to form
the decoction, while the animal fibrin, the portion of the meat that
has some nutritive value, is thrown away.

Beef tea consequently acts as a strong stimulant, tends to increase
inflammation and fever, and in all such cases lessens the chance of
the patient's recovery, as the system is already battling against
toxic elements in the blood. To add to the amount of the latter is
obviously unwise and dangerous. These remarks apply also to 'meat
essences' and to 'beef extracts,' which are frequently made from
diseased flesh which has been condemned in the slaughterhouses.

Meals provided for invalids should be very simple, but served in a
very dainty manner. A spotless serviette and tray cloth, bright
silver, a bunch of flowers and a ribbon to match them in colour for
tying the serviette (the colour of which can be changed from day to
day) should not be forgotten. The food should be supplied in small
quantities; half a cupful of broth will often be taken when a cupful
would be sent away untouched, and the wishes of the patient should be
respected so far as it is safe and wise to do so. It is also a good
plan to serve two or three small separate courses, rather than to put
everything that is provided on a tray together.

Stewed French plums and figs are valuable in the sickroom because of
their laxative effects, and dainty sandwiches will be found acceptable
by most invalids--made with flaked nuts and honey, dried milk
(Lacvitum), potted meat, etc.

[Sidenote: =Don't Overfeed Invalids.=]

One of the greatest evils to be avoided by those who are nursing the
sick is that of over-feeding. When nature is doing her best to meet a
crisis, or to rid the body of microbes or impurities, it is a mistake
to cause waste of vital energy by necessitating the expulsion of
superfluous alimentary matter. Invalids should not be unduly persuaded
to take food. The stomach generally requires _rest_, and is often in
such a condition that digestion is impossible.

Much of the suffering and inconvenience endured by sick persons is
simply the result of erroneous diet. Judicious feeding will do far
more than drugs to alleviate and cure most maladies, in fact drugs and
stimulants are seldom required. The great healing agent is the
Life-force within--the "_Vis medicatrix Naturæ_"--and the wise
physician will see that this power has a fair chance. He will
encourage hopeful mental influence, and advocate pure air, pure food,
and pure water, combined with a cessation of any physical
transgression which has been the _cause_ of the malady in question.

Care should be exercised lest invalids partake too freely of starch
foods, especially if such are insufficiently cooked. Wholemeal bread
should be _light_ and _well baked_, and in most cases it will be more
easily assimilated if toasted. Granose and other similar biscuits
(which consist of entire wheatmeal in a super-cooked form, so that the
starch is already transformed into 'dextrin') will be easily
digestible and are slightly laxative in their effect. They are just
the right thing to be taken with broth or soup or porridge. The
following recipes will be found helpful.


=239. Brown Haricot Broth.=

(A perfect substitute for 'Beef Tea.')

Take 1/2-lb. of brown haricot beans. Wash and stew them with 1-qt. of
hot water and some small onions for 3 hours, stewing down to 1-pt.
Strain, and add pepper, celery-salt and butter when serving. This bean
tea or broth, so prepared, will be found to be very savoury and of the
same taste and appearance as beef tea, while being much richer in
nutriment.


=240. Mock Chicken Broth.=

A valuable substitute for chicken broth, which is in every way
superior to the decoction obtained by stewing the flesh and bones of
the bird, can be made by stewing and serving white haricots in the
same manner as in the previous recipe.


=241. Hygiama Apple Purée.=

Select two or three sound ripe apples, wash and rub in hot water,
remove core and all bruised or dark parts, but not the peel, cut in
small pieces, place in a covered jar or casserole with a cupful of
water, or sufficient to prevent burning. Cook gently until apples are
soft; then rub all through a fine sieve. Mix a tablespoonful or more
of Hygiama with just enough water to form a paste, mix this paste into
the apple, with just a touch of cinnamon or nutmeg if liked, and serve
with pieces of dry toast, twice-baked bread or rusks.


=242. Oat Cream.=

A most excellent recipe for invalids and anæmic patients is prescribed
by Dr. Oldfield, as follows: Boil 1 pint milk, sift into it a large
handful of crushed oats. Simmer until it is thick as raw cream. Strain
and serve; the patient to take 1/2-pint, sucking it through a straw
slowly.


=243. Linseed Tea.=

Few persons realize the good qualities of linseed tea. It is useful
for weak, anæmic and delicate persons; it produces flesh, is soothing
in bronchial cases, and laxative. If made thin, and flavoured with
lemon, it is quite palatable, and many persons get fond of it. The
seed should be whole and of best quality, and it only requires stewing
until the liquor is of the consistency of thin gruel.


=244. proteid Gruel.=

A good liquid food can be quickly made by warming a dessertspoonful of
"Emprote" or "Malted Nuts" in a glass of milk, and flavouring to
taste. A large teaspoonful of "Casumen" (pure milk proteid) dissolved
in a breakfastcup of barley water, coffee, or vegetable soup, also
readily provides much nutriment in a simple form.


=245. Lentil Gruel.=

This is a useful and nutritious food for invalids. To make the gruel,
take a dessertspoonful of lentil flour, mixed smooth in some cold
milk, add nearly 1-pt. of milk which has been brought to the boil.
Boil for 15 minutes and flavour with a little cinnamon or vanilla.
Serve with toast. This is the same as the much prescribed "Revalenta
Arabica" food, but the lentil flour, without a long scientific name,
only costs 3d. a pound, instead of half-a-crown.


=246. Malted Milk Prune Whip.=

One cup of prunes, 2 tablespoonfuls Horlick's Malted Milk, 1
tablespoonful sugar, lemon sufficient to flavour, white of egg. Wash
well, and soak the prunes until tender. Boil with small piece of lemon
until soft. Add sugar, remove stones, rub through colander; add the
Horlick's Malted Milk, beat well; add the white of egg, well beaten.
Cool, and serve with whipped cream. Flavour with vanilla if desired.


=247. Malted Milk Jelly.=

Phosphated gelatine 1 teaspoonful, Horlick's Malted Milk 2 to 4
teaspoonfuls, sugar and flavouring to suit. Soak the gelatine in cold
water for 1 hour, then dissolve in just sufficient hot water. Add the
Horlick's Malted Milk dissolved in 2 cups of hot water, and sweeten
and flavour to taste.


=248. Malted Milk with Iced Fruit.=

Take of Horlick's Malted Milk 1 heaped teaspoonful, crushed fruit 1
tablespoonful, crushed ice 1 tablespoonful, 1 egg, acid phosphate
twenty drops, grated nutmeg to flavour, water to make a cup. Mix the
Malted Milk, crushed fruit and egg, beating the same for five minutes.
Add the phosphate and crushed ice, stirring all for several minutes.
Strain, and add ice-cold water or cold carbonated water, and grated
nutmeg to flavour.


=249. Effervescent Malted Milk.=

Put some finely cracked ice into a glass. Fill it half full of soda,
Vichy or Syphon water, and immediately add the desired amount of
Horlick's Malted Milk in solution. Drink while effervescing. Brandy
may be added if necessary.




=WHAT TO DO AT CHRISTMAS.=


[Illustration]

The Christmas festival--which has degenerated into such a deplorable
orgy of massacre and over-feeding in many countries which are called
'Christian'--can be observed and enjoyed without such barbarities and
butchery as now take place.

How can we consistently sing and talk of 'Peace on Earth' when we are
participating in ruthless warfare against the animal creation?

Is not this wholesale and cruel slaughter altogether discordant with
the spirit and doctrine of the gentle and harmless Teacher of
Nazareth, whose terrestrial birth is thus celebrated by pagan
barbarity? Should not those of us who dare to call ourselves His
followers protest against a custom which brings discredit upon His
religion and causes humanely disposed Oriental nations to regard it
almost with contempt?

The following suggestive Menu will at once show my readers that
Christmas can be celebrated with a feast of good things without such
butchery. And many are they who have found that its joys can even be
enhanced by a sense of freedom from blood-guiltiness and personal
responsibility concerning the deeds that are done in the shambles at
this time of 'Peace and Goodwill.'

The Menu can be varied as taste and circumstances may dictate.


=A Bloodless Menu for Christmas.=

_From which a selection can be made._

    Mock Turtle Soup (4).
      _Fried Bread Dice._
     Julienne Soup (9).
      _Granose Biscuits._
    Mock Scallop Oysters (24).
    Mock White Fish (32).
      _Parsley Sauce._
    Savoury Nut Steaks (50).
    Macaroni Rissoles (68).
      _Sauce Piquante._
    Yorkshire Pudding.
    Potato Purée (109).
    Cauliflowers.
    Baked Stuffed Tomatoes (104).
    Chestnut or Vegetable Soufflé (94 or 97).
    Plum Pudding (178).
    Stewed Pears.
      _Clotted Cream._
    Mince Pies (220).
    Fresh Fruits.
    Almonds and Muscatels.
    Figs.
    Dates.
    Preserved Ginger.


The cost of such a dinner as this will be much less than that of a
corresponding one which includes poultry, game, and joints of flesh.
The amount saved could be appropriately expended in providing a few
comforts for the poor and needy--thus the Christmas festival provides
an opportunity for lessening the suffering in this world, and also for
increasing the sum of human happiness.




=MENUS FOR THE WEEK.=

By MRS. WALTER CAREY.


The following Menus may be a guide to beginners, and show how easy it
is to get variety:--


=Breakfast Menu, No. 1.=


    Manhu Oats. Porridge. Tea or Coffee. Scrambled Eggs on Toast.
    Grilled Tomatoes, No. 122. Neapolitan Sausages, No. 123. Brown
    Bread. Honey. Marmalade. Butter. Fruit.


=Breakfast Menu, No. 2.=

    Manhu Rye Porridge. Tea or Coffee. Granose Biscuits. Eggs à la
    Crême, No. 84. Savoury Rissoles, No. 98. Brown Bread. Honey. Jam.
    Butter. Fruit.


=Breakfast Menu, No. 3.=

    Manhu Wheat Porridge. Tea or Coffee. Omelette aux Tomates, No. 82.
    Potted White Haricots, No. 144. Stewed French Plums, No. 193.
    Brown Bread. Honey. Jam. Butter. Fruit.


=Breakfast Menu, No. 4.=

    Ixion Kornules. Tea or Coffee. Toast. Omelette aux Fines Herbes,
    No. 87. Grilled Mushrooms. Brown Bread. Baked Apples. Butter.
    Marmalade. Honey. Fruit.


=Breakfast Menu, No. 5.=

    Manhu Barley Porridge. Tea or Coffee. Baked Stuffed Tomatoes, No.
    104. Marmite Toast, No. 128. Stewed French Plums. Brown Bread.
    Butter. Marmalade. Honey. Fruit.


=Breakfast Menu, No. 6.=

    Granose Flakes with Hot Milk. Tea or Coffee. Savoury Rissoles, No.
    98. Scrambled Eggs and Tomatoes, No. 88. Brown Bread. Stewed
    Apples. Butter. Marmalade. Honey. Fruit.


=Breakfast Menu, No. 7.=

    Manhu Wheat Porridge. Tea or Coffee. Granose Biscuits. Stewed
    Figs. Fried Eggs and Mushrooms. Milanese Croquettes, No. 113.
    Brown Bread. Butter. Marmalade. Fruit.


=Cold Luncheon Menu, No. 1.=

    Oeufs Farcie en Aspic, No. 131. Salad & Mayonnaise Dressing, No.
    156. Potted Meat Sandwiches, No. 152. Poached Apricots, No. 205.
    Jellied Figs, No. 184. Milk Cheese, No. 155. Scotch Oat Cakes.
    Coffee. Fruit.


=Cold Luncheon Menu, No. 2.=

    Nut Galantine, No. 132. Salad and Mayonnaise Dressing, No. 156.
    Egg and Cress Sandwiches, No. 148. Lemon Sponge, No. 206. Stewed
    and Fresh Fruit. Camembert Cheese. Biscuits. Coffee.


=Luncheon Menu, No. 3.=

    Mock Lobster Shapes in Aspic, No. 135. Tomato Salad. Egg
    Sandwiches, No 147. Mock Chicken Rolls, No. 60. Orange Jelly, No.
    212. Creamed Rice Moulds, No. 185. Gruyère Cheese. Biscuits. P. R.
    Crackers. Coffee. Fruit.


=Luncheon Menu, No. 4.=

    White Haricot Soup, No. 13. Mock Scallop Oysters, No. 24. Eggs
    Florentine, No. 83. Cheese Soufflé. Fruit Tart. Custard. Cheese.
    Fruit. Coffee.


=Luncheon Menu, No. 5.=

    Tomato Soup, No. 6. Mock White Fish, No. 32. Walnut Cutlets, No.
    34. Green Peas. Mashed Potatoes. Castle Puddings, No. 189.
    Meringues. Cheese. Fruit. Coffee.


=Luncheon Menu, No. 6.=

    Brazil Nut Soup, No. 8. Mock Oyster Patties, No. 25. Chestnut
    Stew, No. 130. Creamed Macaroni, No. 70. Rice and Sultana Pudding,
    No. 208. Apple Fritters, No. 210. Cheese. Fruit. Coffee.


=Luncheon Menu, No. 7.=

    Julienne Soup, No. 9. Mock White Fish, No. 32. Savoury Golden
    Marbles, No. 116. Brown Sauce, No. 174. French Beans. Stuffed
    Vegetable Marrow, No. 112. Empress Pudding, No. 211. Cheese
    Straws. Fruit. Coffee.

       *       *       *       *       *


=Dinner Menu, No. 1.=

  _Soups_--Mock Turtle Soup, No. 4. Dinner Rolls, No. 228.
  _Fish_--Fillets of Mock Sole, No. 29. Sauce Hollandaise, No. 166.
  _Rôti_--Nut Timbale, No. 65. Spinach Soufflé, No. 92. Potato
      Croquettes, No. 117.
  _Entrée_--Macaroni à la Turque, No. 67.
  _Sweets_--Plum Pudding, No. 179. White Sauce, No. 167. Semolina
      Moulds, No. 188.
  _Dessert_--Muscatel Raisins. French Plums. Dry Ginger. Fruit and
      Biscuits. Coffee.



=Dinner Menu, No. 2.=

  _Soup_--Chestnut Soup, No. 2. Granose Biscuits. Dinner Rolls, No.
      228.
  _Fish_--Mock White Fish, No. 32.
  _Rôti_--Mock Steak Pudding, No. 59. Parsley Sauce, No 164. Green
      Peas. Potato Purée, No. 109.
  _Entrée_--Spinach Soufflé, No. 92.
  _Sweets_--Sultana and Ginger Pudding, No. 182. Cream, or Fruit
      Sauce, No. 177. Jellied Figs, No. 184.
  _Dessert_--Fruit. Salted Almonds, No. 129. Dry Ginger. Coffee.


=Dinner Menu, No. 3.=

  _Soup_--Celery Soup, No. 16.
  _Fish_--Omelet aux fine Herbes, No. 87.
  _Rôti_--Chestnut and Mushroom Pudding, No. 59. Flaked Potatoes.
      Brussels Sprouts Sauté, No. 102.
  _Entrée_--Green Pea Soufflé, No. 93.
  _Sweets_--Jam Roll. Stewed French Plums, No. 193.
  _Dessert_--Fruit. Sultanas. Figs. Almonds. Coffee.


=Dinner Menu, No. 4.=

  _Soup_--White Haricot Soup, No. 13. Croûtons.
  _Fish_--Mock Oyster Patties, No. 25.
  _Rôti_--Mock Sweetbread Quenelles, No. 43. Mashed Potatoes.
      Cauliflower.
  _Entrée_--Asparagus Soufflé, No. 96.
  _Sweets_--Marmalade Pudding, No. 191. Vanilla Creams.
  _Dessert_--Fruit. Dry Ginger. Biscuits. Coffee.


=Dinner Menu, No. 5.=

  _Soup_--Green Lentil Soup, No. 10. Granose Biscuits.
  _Fish_--Fried Chinese Artichokes, No. 27.
  _Rôti_--Walnut Rissoles, No. 37. French Beans. Mashed Potatoes, No.
      109.
  _Entrée_--Omelet, No. 81. Spinach à la Crême, No. 91.
  _Sweets_--Apple Custard, No. 201. Lemon Cheese Cakes, No. 218.
  _Dessert_--Dry Ginger. Dates. Fruit. Fancy Biscuits. Coffee.


=Dinner Menu, No 6.=

  _Soups_--Tomato Soup, No. 6. Fried Bread Dice.
  _Fish_--Mock Scallop Oysters, No. 24.
  _Rôti_--Purée of Walnuts, No. 40. Spinach à la Crême, No. 91. Mashed
      Potatoes, No. 109.
  _Entrée_--Macaroni Cutlets, No. 68.
  _Sweets_--Empress Pudding, No. 211. Orange Jelly, No. 212.
  _Dessert_--Dry Ginger. Fruit. Fancy Biscuits. Figs and Dates.
      Coffee.


=Dinner Menu, No. 7.=

  _Soup_--Artichoke Soup, No. 1. Granose Biscuits.
  _Fish_--Green Artichokes, No. 26.
  _Rôti_--Nut Croquettes, No. 41. Yorkshire Pudding, No. 119. Brown
      Gravy, No. 162. Mashed Potatoes, No. 109.
  _Entrée_--Baked Stuffed Tomatoes, No. 104.
  _Sweets_--Fruit Salad, No. 180. Custard Moulds, No. 194.
  _Dessert_--Fruit. Salted Almonds. Roast Pine Kernels. Dry Ginger.
      Biscuits. Coffee.




=Hints to Housekeepers.=


A few simple hints to those who are trying the vegetarian recipes in
this book may be useful.

Cooking utensils should be kept quite separate from those used for
meat, fish or fowl.

Nut-oil or nut-butter should always be used for frying, and the right
heat is known when a slight blue haze rises above the pan, or by
dipping a finger of bread in the oil, when if hot enough it will at
once fry brown and crisp. After frying it is always best to place the
articles fried on some folded tissue paper to drain out the frying
oil.

Marmite, Nutril and Carnos make good additions to stock for flavouring
soups and gravies.

In this kind of cookery there is no waste, all the food is edible and
anything that remains over from dishes can be put together and made
into curries, stews, cottage pie, etc., etc.

Excellent Salads can be made by the addition of uncooked scraped and
sliced carrots and beetroot; and also by chopping up very finely
celery, Brussels sprouts, French beans, green peas, cabbage, parsley,
onions, etc. The bright colours of these raw vegetables are most
useful in decorating galantines and other cold dishes, and when
arranged with regard to colour, make a most artistic garnishing and
are most wholesome.

Pea nuts, pine kernels, and hazel nuts are much improved in flavour by
being put in a baking pan in the oven until slightly browned.

Lemon juice is a good substitute for vinegar in all sauces.

For making a smooth soup it is a good plan to rub the vegetables after
they are cooked through a very fine hair sieve.

In making cutlets a stick of macaroni should be inserted in the thin
end of the cutlet to represent a bone, it may be fried or not with the
cutlet.

From several years' experience I have found the non-flesh cookery is
most economical, the expense being less than half that of the
corresponding meat dishes.

    =Margaret Carey=




=UNFIRED AND VITAL FOODS.=


The following practical information and suggestions will be found
helpful by those who wish to test the advantages of living solely upon
uncooked foods--as now recommended by so many progressive physicians,
dietetic specialists, and teachers of hygiene. Although such a
strictly simple and natural dietary may at first involve some
gustatory self-denial, the benefits resulting from its use are
declared by many who speak from personal experience to be well worthy
of any inconvenience or sacrifice involved.

=List of Foods and Fruits. etc., that can be eaten uncooked.=

  _Cheeses_--Camembert, Cheddar, Cheshire, Cream, Dutch, Gorgonzola,
      Gruyère, Gloucester, Half-cheese, Pommel, Port Salut, Stilton,
      St. Ivel, Wenslet, Wensleydale, Wiltshire, etc.

  _Fruits_--(Dried) Apples, apricots, currants, dates, figs,
      muscatels, peaches, prunes or French plums, pears, raisins,
      sultanas, etc.

  (Fresh) Apples, bananas, blackberries, currants, cantaloupes,
      cherries, damsons, gooseberries, greengages, green figs, lemons,
      melons, mulberries, nectarines, orange, pineapple, pears,
      peaches, plums, pomegranates, quince, raspberries, strawberries,
      tangerines, etc.

  _Nuts_--(Fresh) Almonds, Barcelona, Brazil, cobs, coconuts,
      filberts, Spanish, walnuts, etc.

  (Shelled) Almonds, Barcelona, cashew, hazel, pea-nut, pine kernels,
      walnuts, etc.

  _Roots_--Artichokes, carrots, parsnips, turnips and potatoes (which
      must be very finely grated).

  _Vegetables_--Cabbage (red and white), cauliflower, corn salad,
      cucumber, celery, chicory, endive, lettuce, leeks, mustard and
      cress, onion, parsley, radishes, sprouts, spinach, salsify,
      seakale, tomatoes, watercress, etc.


=RECIPES.=

  _Nut-meat_--2-ozs. shelled nuts, 1-oz. bread, 1 tablespoonful of
      milk. Put nuts and bread through a nut-mill. Mix together with
      milk. Roll out thin and cut into shapes with glass. This is
      sufficient for two. Look well over nuts before using, do not
      blanch almonds but rub them well with a cloth.

  _Unfired Pudding or Cakes_--1-oz. each of dates, sultanas, currants,
      candied peel and French plums, and 2-ozs. nuts. Put all through
      a nut-mill and mix well together. Roll out and make into cakes.
      For a pudding, put mixture in a well greased basin, press down,
      leave for an hour or so and turn out. If too moist add
      breadcrumbs. Serve with cream.

  _Unfired Dried Fruit Salad_--Ingredients as for pudding, but do not
      put through a mill; chop all the fruit and nuts and serve dry
      with cream.

  _Dried Fruits_, such as French plums, peaches or apricots should be
      put in soak for 12 hours. Do not cook.


SALADS.

  _Brussels Sprouts_--Use hearts only, which cut into small pieces.

  _Cabbage_--Use hearts only, which cut into small pieces.

  _Cauliflower_--Use flower part only, which cut into small pieces.

  _Chicory or Seakale_--Cut into small pieces.

  _Lettuce_--In the usual way.

  _Spinach and Mint_--Use leaves only, which cut up very small.

  _Root Salad_--Carrots or beetroot and turnips. Peel and put through
      a nut-mill and mix well together.

  Most green salads are improved with the addition of radishes.

  Salads can be mixed ad lib., but a greater variety of food is
      secured by using one or two vegetables only at a time.

  _Salad Dressing_--(1) Half a cup of oil, 1 tablespoonful of lemon
      juice and the yolk of an egg. Mix egg with oil and add lemon
      afterwards. (2) Half a cup of oil and one well mashed tomato
      mixed well together.

  _Flavourings_--For Nut-meat--Use grated lemon peel, mint, thyme or
      grated onion. For Dried Fruit Pudding or Cake--Use ground
      cinnamon, grated lemon peel, nutmeg, ground or preserved ginger.


=QUANTITIES.=

    First meal at 11 o'clock--Per Person--approximately--

    2-ozs. cheese.
    2-ozs. dried Fruit.
    3-ozs. salad or root salad.
    2-ozs. brown bread, biscuits or unfired bread with butter.

    Second meal at 7 o'clock--

    2-ozs. nut-meat.
    6-ozs. raw fruit.
    3-ozs. salad.
    2-ozs. brown bread, biscuits or unfired bread and butter.

    It is well to drink only between meals, i.e., first thing in the
    morning after dressing; between first and second meal; and before
    going to bed. No alcohol or strong tea and coffee should be taken.




=SOME SUGGESTIVE MENUS.=


=_Spring--(March-April-May.)_=


=FIRST MEAL.=

  SUNDAY--Tomato and Onion Salad. Cheese (St. Ivel). Unfired Pudding
      and Cream.

  MONDAY--Carrot and Beetroot Salad. Cheese (Pommel). Dried Figs.

  TUESDAY--Onions. Cheese (Cheddar). Dates.

  WEDNESDAY--Seakale Salad. Cheese (Gruyère). Raisins.

  THURSDAY--Salsify Salad. Cheese (Camembert). Sultanas.

  FRIDAY--Celery Salad. Cheese (Wiltshire). French Plums.

  SATURDAY--Batavia. Cheese (Cheshire). Dried Apricots.


=SECOND MEAL.=

  SUNDAY--Cucumber Salad. Nut-meat (Jordan Almonds). Fresh Fruit
      Salad.

  MONDAY--Endive Salad. Nut-meat (Hazel). Apples.

  TUESDAY--Spring Cabbage Salad. Nut-meat (Pine Kernels). Oranges.

  WEDNESDAY--Corn Salad and Radishes. Nut-meat (Cashew). Red Bananas.

  THURSDAY--Watercress and Radishes. Nut-meat (Shelled Walnuts).
      Tangerines.

  FRIDAY--Spinach and Mint Salad. Nut-meat (Barcelona). Bananas
      (Canary or Jamaica).

  SATURDAY--Cauliflower Salad. Nut-meat (Peanuts). Fresh Cape Fruit.


=_Summer--(June-July-August.)_=


=FIRST MEAL.=

  SUNDAY--Tomato and Parsley Salad. Cheese (Dutch). Peaches.

  MONDAY--Carrot and Turnip Salad. Cheese (Cream). Apples.

  TUESDAY--Spring Onion Salad. Cheese (Cheddar). Plums.

  WEDNESDAY--Endive (summer) Salad. Cheese (Half-cheese). White
      Currants.

  THURSDAY--Cabbage Lettuce Salad. Cheese (Stilton). Pears.

  FRIDAY--Seakale Salad. Cheese (Gorgonzola). Banana.

  SATURDAY--Corn Salad & Radishes. Cheese (Gloucester). Raspberries.


=SECOND MEAL.=

  SUNDAY--Cucumber Salad. Nut-meat (Pine Kernels). Fresh Fruit Salad.

  MONDAY--Lettuce Salad. Nut-meat (Cashew). Strawberries.

  TUESDAY--Watercress and Radishes. Nut-meat (Almonds). Red Currants.

  WEDNESDAY--Summer Cabbage Salad. Nut-meat (Shelled Walnuts).
      Greengages.

  THURSDAY--Cauliflower and Mustard and Cress. Nut-meat (Hazels).
      Gooseberries.

  FRIDAY--Mixed Salad. Nut-meat (Barcelona). Black Currants.

  SATURDAY--Lettuce and Radishes. Nut-meat (Peanuts). Cherries.


=_Autumn--(September-October-November.)_=


=FIRST MEAL.=

  SUNDAY--Tomato Salad. Cheese or Fresh Almonds. Pineapple.

  MONDAY--Carrots and Celery. Cheese or Fresh Cob Nuts. Damsons.

  TUESDAY--Corn Salad and Radishes. Cheese or Filberts. Apples (Golden
      Nobs).

  WEDNESDAY--Brussels Sprouts Salad. Cheese or Barcelona Nuts. Melon.

  THURSDAY--Onion Salad. Cheese or Brazil Nuts. Grapes (White).

  FRIDAY--Endive Salad. Cheese or Fresh Walnuts. Bananas.

  SATURDAY--Red Cabbage. Cheese or Hazel Nuts. Pears.


=SECOND MEAL.=

  SUNDAY--Cucumber Salad. Nut-meat (Almonds). Fresh Fruit Salad.

  MONDAY--Chicory Salad. Nut-meat (Hazel). Grapes (Black).

  TUESDAY--Cabbage Lettuce Salad. Nut-meat (Pine Kernels). Pears.

  WEDNESDAY--Celery. Nut-meat (Walnuts). Green Figs.

  THURSDAY--Cauliflower Salad. Nut-meat (Cashew). Blackberries.

  FRIDAY--Watercress and Radishes. Nut-meat (Barcelona). Quince.

  SATURDAY--White Cabbage Salad. Nut-meat (Peanuts). Apples.


=_Winter--(December-January-February.)_=


=FIRST MEAL.=

  SUNDAY--Tomato and Celery Salad. Cheese or Fresh Almonds. Dried
      Fruit Salad.

  MONDAY--Carrots and Artichokes. Cheese or Cob Nuts. Dried Figs.

  TUESDAY--Onions. Cheese or Fresh Walnuts. Dates.

  WEDNESDAY--Batavia. Cheese or Brazil Nuts. Raisins.

  THURSDAY--Cauliflower Salad. Cheese or Filberts. Sultanas and
      Currants.

  FRIDAY--Red Cabbage Salad. Cheese or Barcelona Nuts. French Plums.

  SATURDAY--Mixed Root Salad. Cheese or Spanish Nuts. Dried Peaches.


=SECOND MEAL.=

  SUNDAY--Cucumber Salad. Nut-meat (Pine Kernels). Fresh Fruit Salad.

  MONDAY--Celery Salad. Nut-meat (Hazel). Oranges.

  TUESDAY--Winter Cabbage. Nut-meat (Almonds). Bananas.

  WEDNESDAY--Corn Salad & Radishes. Nut-meat (Walnuts). Grapes.

  THURSDAY--Cabbage Lettuce Salad. Nut-meat (Cashew). Red Bananas.

  FRIDAY--Chicory Salad. Nut-meat (Peanuts). Tangerines.

  SATURDAY--Endive Salad. Nut-meat (Barcelona). Apples.

The above Menus are compiled by the Misses Julie and Rose Moore.




=USEFUL DOMESTIC INFORMATION.=


[Illustration]

A clove of garlic will give a very delicate and tasty flavour to many
soups and other dishes. For soups it is only necessary to rub the
tureen with the cut clove before the soup is poured in. For savoury
dishes and stews one small clove may be boiled (after being peeled) in
the stewpan for five minutes.


To remove the skins from tomatoes place them in boiling water for
about two minutes.


Turnips taste much better if a little cream is added to them after
being mashed.


Any cold green vegetable can be used to make a soufflé. It should be
rubbed through a sieve, and then 1 or 2 well-beaten eggs should be
added. A few drops of Tarragon vinegar may be used to change the
flavour. (See Recipe 97).


Cheese should be crumbly, as it is then more easily digestible. It is
a good plan to test it in the following manner:--First buy a small
piece and melt a portion with milk in a double saucepan; if it has a
granulated appearance it is safe to buy some more of the same cheese;
if, on the contrary, it is tough and stringy, it should be avoided, as
it will be found lacking in nutriment and will be very liable to cause
digestive troubles.


Butter should be made to look dainty and appetising by being prepared
for the table with butter pats. Small pieces can be twisted round to
form the shape of a hollow shell. It may also be rolled into marbles
and be garnished with parsley.


Parsley can be made a brilliant green by placing it in a cloth (after
chopping), dipping it in cold water, and wringing it tightly in the
hands, squeezing it with the fingers. For garnishing savoury puddings
or fried potatoes, etc., this is worth knowing.

Parsley which has been used for garnishing, or which is in danger of
going to seed, can be preserved green for seasoning purposes by
placing it in the oven on a sheet of paper, and drying it slowly in
such a manner that it does not burn; it should then be rubbed through
a sieve and put into a bottle.


All boiled puddings should be allowed room to swell, or they may prove
heavy when served.


Instead of chopping onions, a coarse nutmeg grater should be kept for
the purpose, and the onion should be grated like lemon rind. This
saves much time and labour and answers better for flavouring soups,
gravies, or savouries of any kind.

The addition of some bicarbonate of soda to the water in which onions
are boiled will neutralize the strong flavour of the oil contained in
them, and prevent it from becoming troublesome to those with whom it
disagrees.


Freshly cut vegetables are more digestible and wholesome than those
which have been lying about in crates or shop windows. They also cook
more quickly. The water in which vegetables have been boiled should be
saved for stock for soups and gravies (except in the case of
potatoes).


To prevent hard-boiled eggs from becoming discoloured, they should be
plunged into cold water as soon as they are removed from the saucepan.


Those of my readers who wish to use unfermented and saltless breads
and cakes can obtain the same from the Wallace P. R. Bakery. The
purity of goods supplied from this factory can be depended upon.


When it is difficult to obtain pineapples for making fruit salads, the
same enhanced flavour can be secured by adding some of Dole's Hawaiian
Pineapple Juice.


To prevent the odour of boiled cabbage pervading the house, place a
piece of bread in the saucepan.


Flaked nuts, if sprinkled over puddings, custards, trifles or jellies,
greatly improve the flavour and appearance.


In the preparation of soups, stews, &c., the preliminary frying of the
vegetables improves the flavour and dispenses with any insipidity. The
oil should be fried until it is brown.




=HOW TO COOK VEGETABLES.=


=Artichokes= should be boiled until tender only. If over-boiled they
become dark coloured and flavourless.

=Asparagus= should be cut into equal lengths and tied into bundles.
These should be stood on end in a deep stewpan, leaving the tops about
an inch above the water. When the stalks are tender the tops will be
cooked also. This plan prevents the tops falling off through being
over-cooked.

=Cabbage= should only be boiled until tender; if over-cooked it is
pulpy and flavourless. Boiling too fast causes the unpleasant odour to
be given off which is sometimes noticeable in a house when this
vegetable is being cooked. The lid of the saucepan should not be used.

=Cauliflower= must not be boiled until its crispness is lost. It must
be only just tender enough to eat. It can be served 'au gratin' (120),
or as in recipe No. 121.

=Carrots= should be steamed, not boiled. The skins should then be
wiped off and they should be served with a white or brown gravy. They
are also nice if scraped, sliced and stewed in haricot broth (recipe
239). The smaller the carrots the more delicate will the flavour be.

=Kidney or Haricot Beans= need to be carefully trimmed so that all
stringy parts are cut away. They should be boiled until tender, and no
longer, and served with thin white sauce. The smaller and greener
they are the better.

Old pods should remain unpicked until nearly ripe, when the solid
beans can be used for haricot soup or entrées. The 'Czar' bean is the
best to grow; it is the giant white haricot, and the seeds are
delicious when picked fresh and cooked at once. There is the same
difference between fresh and dried haricots, as between green and
dried peas. Dried Haricots must be soaked in cold water for twelve
hours before being cooked. They can then be stewed until tender--the
water being saved for soup or stock.

=Vegetable Marrow= should be steamed or boiled in its jacket. The
flavour is lost if this is removed before cooking.

=Mushrooms= should be fried very slowly in a small quantity of butter.
They should be stirred during the process, and the heat employed must
be very moderate indeed or they will be made tough. They can also be
stewed, and served in the gravy when thickened with arrowroot.

=Potatoes= should be cooked in their jackets. To boil them in the best
way, the water in the saucepan should be thrown away when they have
been boiled for 5 minutes and cold water should be substituted. This
plan equalises the cooking of the interior and exterior of the
potatoes. When cooked they should be drained, a clean cloth should be
placed over the pan and they should stand on the hot plate to dry.
They should be lifted out separately, and should be unbroken and
floury. Sodden potatoes ought to be regarded as evidence of
incompetency on the part of the cook.

Potatoes baked in their jackets are considered by many to be
preferable, and, as it is almost impossible to spoil them if this plan
is adopted, it should be employed when the cook is inexperienced.

Fried potatoes, cooked in the Devonshire fashion, are nice for
breakfast. It is best to remove some from the stewpan when half cooked
on the previous day. These should be cut up in a frying pan in which a
fair amount of butter has been melted, and the knife should be used
while they cook. In a few minutes the potatoes should be well packed
together, so that the under-side will brown; an inverted plate should
then be pressed on them and the pan should be turned upside down while
the plate is held in position with one hand. A neat and
savoury-looking dish will thus be made, but over-cooking must be
avoided previous to the browning process, or they will look sloppy.

Potatoes can be mashed with a little milk and butter. They should then
be packed into a pretty shape and garnished with chopped parsley
(109).

Another way of cooking them is to use the frying basket and dip them
in very hot Nutter. They should either be cut into thin fingers
previously, or else be half boiled and broken into pieces. This
latter plan is perhaps best of all, and they are then termed "potatoes
sauté," and are sprinkled with chopped parsley before being served.

A very savoury dish can be made by boiling some potatoes until nearly
tender, and then putting them in a pie dish with small pieces of
butter sprinkled over them; they should then be baked until nicely
browned.

To make potatoes _white_ when cooked they should be steeped in cold
water for two hours after peeling.

=Peas= should be placed in a covered jar with a little butter, and
should be steamed until tender. No water is required in the jar. The
pods, if clean and fresh, should be washed, slowly steamed, rubbed
through a colander, and added to any soup or other suitable dish in
preparation. Another method is to boil the peas with mint, salt, sugar
and a pinch of bicarbonate of soda added to the water. Small young
peas should always be chosen in preference to those which are old and
large.

=Spinach= should be cooked according to the directions given in
recipes 90 to 92, or 103.

=Beetroot= should be baked in the oven instead of being boiled. By
this method the flavour is improved and the juices retained.




=LABOUR-SAVING APPLIANCES.=


Domestic work in the kitchen may be very much simplified and lightened
if proper utensils are employed, and those who are able to do so
should obtain the following appliances, in addition to those which are
generally used:--

=The 'Dana' Nut-Mill.= This is used for making bread crumbs from
crusts or stale bread; for flaking nuts and almonds, etc., so as to
make them more easy of digestion, and nut-butter so as to make it mix
more conveniently with dough when employed for making pastry and
cheese--rendering it more readily digestible. This nut-mill may be
obtained from G. Savage & Sons, 33, Aldersgate Street, London, E. C.,
and from Health Food Depôts (price 7/6). It serves the same purpose as
a sausage machine as well.

=A Frying-Basket= is necessary for letting down rissoles, croquettes,
cutlets, fritters, potato chips, etc., into the stewpan which is kept
for frying purposes. The stewpan should be four or five inches deep,
so as to avoid the possibility of the Nutter or vegetable fat bubbling
over and catching fire upon the stove. Aluminium or nickel are the
best metals.

=A Raisin Stoner.= It enables one to stone a large quantity of fruit
in a very short time. Most ironmongers stock these machines.

=A Potato Masher.= Necessary for flaking potatoes and preparing
haricot beans, peas, etc., for admixture in rissoles or croquettes. By
this means the skins can be easily removed after they are cooked.

=A Wire Sieve= (about 1/8th-inch mesh). Useful for preparing spinach,
and in many other ways which will suggest themselves to every cook.

=A Duplex Boiler.= For scalding milk by means of a steam jacket. It
prevents burning, and boiling over. The =Gourmet Boiler= is a valuable
cooking appliance of the same sort. Failing these a double saucepan is
necessary.

=A Chopping Basin=--a wooden bowl with a circular chopper which fits
it. This prevents the pieces from jumping off and lessens the time
occupied. It is also less noisy and can be used while the operator is
seated.

=A Vegetable Slicer.= The best appliance for this purpose is a
combination tool--made so that one can slice carrots, etc., to any
size and thickness, and also core apples, peel potatoes and perform
other functions with it.

=A Metal Frying Pan.= A nickel, aluminium, or steel frying pan is
almost a necessity. Enamel chips off very soon and is dangerous, as it
may cause appendicitis.




=MEDICINAL AND DIETETIC QUALITIES.=


As it is important that those who adopt a reformed diet should know
something about the dietetic and medicinal value of the articles they
consume, the following information may prove helpful:--

[Illustration]

=Apples= purify the blood, feed the brain with phosphorus, and help to
eliminate urates and earthy salts from the system. As they contain a
small amount of starch, and a good proportion of grape sugar combined
with certain valuable acids, they constitute a most desirable and
hygienic food for all seasons. They should be ripe and sweet when
eaten. People who cannot digest apples in the ordinary way should
scrape them, and thus eat them in _pulp_ rather than in _pieces_.

=Bananas= also contain phosphorus, and are consequently suitable for
mental workers. They are easily digestible, and nutritious, being
almost a food in themselves.

=French Plums= are judicious food for persons of nervous temperament
and for those whose habits are sedentary; they prevent constipation,
and are nutritious. They should be well stewed, and eaten with cream,
Plasmon snow-cream, or Coconut cream (see recipe 224).

=Strawberries= contain phosphorus and iron, and are therefore
especially desirable for mental workers and anæmic invalids.

=Tomatoes= are good for those who suffer from sluggish liver. The
popular fallacy that they are liable to cause cancer, which was
circulated by thoughtless persons some few years since, has been
pronounced, by the highest medical authorities, to be unsupported by
any evidence whatever, and to be most improbable and absurd. In the
Island of Mauritius this fruit is eaten at almost every meal, and
Bishop Royston stated that during his episcopate of eighteen years he
only heard of one case of the disease.

=Lettuce= is soothing to the system and purifying to the blood. It
should be well dressed with pure olive oil and wine vinegar (2
spoonfuls of oil to 1 of vinegar, well mixed together, with a pinch of
sugar). A lettuce salad eaten with bread and cheese makes a nutritious
and ample meal. The thin and tender-leaved variety (grown under glass
if possible) should always be chosen.

=Figs= contain much fruit sugar which can be rapidly assimilated, and
are very nourishing and easily digestible; when they can be obtained
in their green state they are specially desirable. They may be
considered one of the most valuable of all fruits, and are most
helpful in many cases of sickness on account of their laxative
medicinal properties.

=Dates= are very similar to figs, and are both sustaining and warming;
they are easily digested if the skins are thin.

=Gooseberries=, =Raspberries=, =Currants= and =Grapes= are cooling and
purifying food for hot weather; but, if unripe, they will often upset
the liver. This type of fruit should not be eaten unless _ripe_ and
_sweet_.

=Walnuts, Hazel and Brazil Nuts= contain a considerable amount of oil,
and are consequently useful for warming the body and feeding and
strengthening the nerves. Vegetable fat in this form is emulsified and
more easily assimilated than free animal fats, as in butter, etc. Nuts
are also rich in proteid matter. Where people find that they cannot
masticate nuts, owing to impairment of teeth, the difficulty may be
removed by passing the nuts through a 'Dana' nut-mill. When thus
flaked and spread between thin slices of bread and butter, with honey,
they make delicious sandwiches for lunch. A pinch of curry powder
(instead of the honey) makes them taste savoury.

=Chestnuts= contain a larger proportion of starch, but are digested
without difficulty when boiled in their jackets until fairly soft. If
eaten with a pinch of salt they make a nice dish.

=Pineapples= are valuable for cases of diphtheria and sore-throat, as
the juice makes an excellent gargle. This fruit is considered to aid
digestion in certain cases.

=Cheese= is very rich in protein--far more so than lean beef. If well
chosen, and new, it is a most valuable article of diet, and feeds
brain, nerves, and muscles; but as it is a concentrated food it should
not be taken in excessive quantity. Half a pound of cheese is almost
equal to a pound of average flesh meat. The best varieties are
Wenslet, Gruyère (very rich in phosphorus), Port Salut, Milk (155),
Wensleydale, Cheshire and Cheddar.

=Protose, Nuttose=, and similar malted nut-meats, are more than
equivalent to lean beef--minus water, waste products, and disease
germs. The International Health Association first invented these
valuable substitutes for animal food, and has an able advisory medical
staff, therefore they may be regarded as results of modern dietetic
research. Protose contains 25% protein and 14% fat.

=White Haricots= are rich in protein (far more so than lean meat), and
should be eaten in moderation. Brown haricots contain iron in addition
to their large percentage of protein.

=Lentils= are almost identical in composition, but are more suitable
for those who do not have much physical toil.

=Peas= are slightly less nitrogenous than lentils and haricots, but
otherwise very similar; they are best when eaten in a green form, and
when young and tender. When they are old the peas should always be
passed through a potato masher, as the skins are very indigestible.

=Macaroni= contains starch and a certain amount of the gluten of
wheat. Some of the best varieties are made with eggs as well as flour.
Tomato sauce is the best accompaniment to it, with Parmesan or grated
and melted cheese (see recipes 66 to 71).

=Rice= as usually sold consists chiefly of starch, but if unglazed and
_once milled_, it is much more nourishing, as the cuticle of the
cereal (which is rich in gluten and protein) is then left on it. The
addition of cheese or eggs, makes it a more complete food (see recipes
72 to 80).

=Potatoes= consist principally of starch and water, with a certain
amount of potash. Their dietetic value is not high.

=Wholewheat Bread= contains, in addition to its starch, much vegetable
albumen, and a large supply of mineral salts, such as phosphates, etc.
It is, therefore, when light and well cooked, of high dietetic value
both for flesh-forming and nerve feeding. Physical workers should use
it as a staple article of food, and mental workers will also find it
most helpful. The coarser the brown flour, the more laxative is the
influence of the bread. This is point worth noting.

=Eggs= are nutritive chiefly on account of the albumen which they
contain in the white portion, but they are liable to cause digestive
trouble, and they must not be taken too freely by those who are
subject to biliousness and constipation. Such persons often find it
advantageous to have them boiled quite hard.

=Emprote= (Eustace Miles proteid Food) contains the proteids of wheat
and milk (35%), with digestible Carbohydrates (45.2%), fat (6.6%), and
assimilable salts (7.9%). It makes a good addition to soups,
beverages, and dishes lacking in protein.

=Nuto-Cream Meat= is a modern substitute for white meat and poultry,
containing 19.7% protein, 48% fat, and 23% Carbohydrates. It is made
from nuts and corn, and is useful for invalids and young children.

=Milk= contains nearly all the elements necessary for repairing bodily
waste. It should be scalded for half-an-hour in a double saucepan--to
destroy tubercular and other germs. If then allowed to stand for 12
hours, clotted cream can be skimmed off (as in Devonshire) and the
milk can be used next day. It keeps much longer after being thus
scalded. Dried milk is now procurable in such forms as 'Lacvitum' and
'Plasmon.'

=Celery= is a useful blood purifier, and is valuable in all cases of
rheumatism, gout, &c. Celery salt is a valuable addition to soups and
savoury dishes, and is preferable to common salt.

=Spinach= contains a considerable quantity of iron in a readily
assimilable form, and is, therefore, good for anæmic persons.

=Onions= have a wonderfully improving effect upon the skin and
complexion if eaten raw, and they act powerfully as diuretics.




=HYGIENIC INFORMATION.=


[Sidenote: =How to Keep Young.=]

Old age is accompanied by the accumulation in the body of certain
earthy salts which tend to produce ossification. The deposit of these
in the walls of the arteries impedes the circulation, and produces
senility and decrepitude. Flesh-food accelerates this process, but the
juices of fruits, and distilled or soft water, dissolve out these
deposits. The older one becomes the more freely should one partake of
fruit and soft water.

The more juicy fruit we consume, the less drink of any kind we
require, and the water contained in fruit is of Nature's purest and
best production.

Frequent bathing and the occasional use of the vapour bath also help
to eliminate these deposits, and those whose skins are never made to
perspire by wholesome exercise in the open air must cause this
healthful operation to take place by other means--or pay the penalty
which Nature exacts.

[Sidenote: =Food and Climate.=]

Vegetable oils and fats produce heat and build up the nerves. We
require a much larger amount of food containing fat in cold weather
and in cold climates than in warm weather and in warm climates. By
producing fruits in profusion in the summer-time Nature provides for
the satisfaction of our instinctive desire for such simple and cooling
diet when the temperature is high. But in winter-time more cheese,
butter, olive oil, or nuts, should be eaten every day.

[Sidenote: =Cancer and Flesh-eating.=]

The latest declarations of some of the principal British medical
authorities on 'Cancer' are to the effect that people become afflicted
with this disease through the excessive consumption of animal flesh.
The alimentary canal becomes obstructed with decomposing matter, toxic
elements are generated and absorbed in the system, and cancerous
cellular proliferation ensues. It is noteworthy that fruitarians are
scarcely ever afflicted with this disease, and that a strict
fruitarian dietary (uncooked) has often proved curative. See pages 133
and 166.

[Sidenote: =How to avoid Dyspepsia.=]

If the digestive process is unduly delayed by overloading the stomach,
or by drinking much at meal-times so as to dilute the gastric juice,
fermentation, flatulence and impaired health are likely to result. Raw
sugar if taken very freely with starch foods is also apt to produce
fermentation.

It is a mistake to mix acid fruits and vegetables by eating them
together at the same meal. Fermentation is often thus caused, as
vegetables take a long time to digest. A very safe rule to observe,
and one which would save many from physical discomfort and suffering,
is this--only eat fruits which are palatable in the natural uncooked
state. Before Man invented the art of cooking, he must have followed
this rule.

Those who suffer from dyspepsia will, in most instances, derive
benefit by taking two meals a day instead of three--or at any rate by
substituting a cup of coffee or of hot skimmed milk and a few brown
biscuits for the third meal. Hard workers are the only persons who can
really get hungry three times a day, and we ought not to take our
meals without "hunger sauce." Fruit alone, for the third meal is
better still.

The last meal of the day should not be taken after seven o'clock at
night. Disturbed rest and the habit of dreaming are an almost certain
indication of errors in diet having been committed, or of this rule
having been infringed.

Probably the most valuable prescription ever given to a patient was
that given by Dr. Abernethy to a wealthy dyspeptic, "Live on sixpence
a day and earn it."

Constipation can nearly always be cured by adding stewed figs, French
plums, salads, etc., to one's menu, by eating brown instead of white
bread, and by taking less proteid food.

Tea is detrimental to many persons. The tannin contained in it
toughens albuminous food, and is liable to injure the sensitive lining
of the stomach. China tea is the least harmful.

[Sidenote: =Rest after Meals.=]

Those who work their brains or bodies actively, immediately after a
solid meal, simply invite dyspepsia. The vital force required for
digestion is diverted and malnutrition follows. The deluded
business-man who "cannot spare the time" for a short rest or stroll
after lunch, often damages his constitution and finds that he has
been "penny wise and pound foolish."

If the brain or body has been severely taxed, an interval of rest
should be secured before food is taken. It is not _what we eat_ that
nourishes us, but _what we are able to assimilate_. Recreation,
occasional amusement, and an interest in life are necessary. Thousands
of women die from monotony and continuous domestic care; multitudes of
men succumb to mental strain and incessant business anxiety. Chronic
dyspeptics should reflect on these facts.

Abstainers from animal-food who get into any difficulty about their
diet should seek advice from those who have experience, or should
consult a fruitarian physician. The local names and addresses of
doctors who both practice and advise this simple and natural system of
living, will be supplied upon application to the Hon. Secretary of The
Order of the Golden Age. Such are increasing in number every month.

[Sidenote: =Physical Vitality.=]

The human body is a storage battery consisting of millions of cells in
which the vital electricity that produces health, and makes life
enjoyable, is accumulated.

Every manifestation of physical and mental power depends upon the
force stored up in this battery. The more fully charged the cells the
higher the voltage, and, consequently, the greater the physical
vitality and power. This voltage is always fluctuating. Expenditure
of force lessens it; recuperation, through rest, sleep, the
in-breathing of oxygen, and the assimilation of vital uncooked food
increases it.

Fruits, nuts, and root vegetables contain electrical potency--they
will deflect the needle of a highly sensitive Kelvin galvanometer. But
when cooked, their vital electricity is destroyed--they become
_lifeless_, like flesh-food.

The accumulation of vital force is a possibility if natural and vital
food is selected.

[Sidenote: =The Great Healer.=]

All the medicines in the world are as the small dust of the balance,
potentially, when weighed against this Life-force--which "healeth all
our diseases and redeemeth our life from destruction." Its therapeutic
phenomena are truly wonderful.

When our bodies are invaded by malevolent microbes, the defensive
corpuscles within us, if in fit condition, destroy them. But if not
fed with those elements which are needful for their sustenance, they
soon "run down"--just as we ourselves get "below par." We are then
liable to become the prey of those ceaseless microscopic enemies that
are ever ready to pounce upon the unfit.

If our corpuscles are weaker than the invading foes, no drugs can save
us--we are doomed. Hence the importance of keeping ourselves and our
nerve centres well charged and in vigorous condition.

[Sidenote: =How to Accumulate Vitality.=]

To accumulate vitality our food must contain all the chemical elements
which we need. None must be permanently omitted. If, for instance, we
entirely exclude organic phosphorus from the food of a man of great
intellect, he will, in due time, be reduced to imbecility. This is
obtained in such foods as cheese, milk, wholemeal bread, peas, apples,
strawberries, and bananas.

We must live by _method_, and take some trouble. Nature's greatest
gift is not to be obtained without thought or effort. We must eat,
breathe, and live wisely; and the closer to Nature we get, the better
it will be for us.

The habit of deep breathing, like that of living much in the open air,
yields important results. The atmosphere consists of oxygen and
nitrogen--the very elements of which our bodies are chiefly
constructed. Life and vigour _can be inhaled_, but few persons have
learnt the art.

Cheerfulness tends to promote the assimilation of food. Exercise--of
an intelligent and healthful sort--is needful to make the life-current
pulsate through our tissues. Without it our organs do not get properly
nourished and rebuilt: stiffness and atrophy set in. Worry and care
must be banished, and unwise or excessive expenditure of nerve force
avoided; for these things deplete the human storage battery of its
vitality.

Mankind is slowly gaining greater knowledge of vital, mental, and
spiritual truth. Ultimately, "Life more abundant" will become the
heritage of the many instead of the few.

Self-emancipation from weakness and disability is an achievement that
will repay much effort on the part of each one of us; and we can all
render beneficent social service by exemplifying the art of living
wisely.

By promoting hygienic and humane education, we can prevent much
suffering, and greatly increase the sum of happiness in this world!

[Illustration: =Finis=]


    All readers who feel that they have derived helpful and useful
    knowledge by reading this book, are respectfully invited to make
    it known to their friends and neighbours, or to present copies to
    them. All financial profit arising from its sale is devoted to the
    philanthropic work of The Order of the Golden Age and the
    exaltation of its hygienic and humane Ideals.

    Booksellers, Secretaries of Food-Reform, Physical Culture, and
    other Societies (and readers requiring quantities for
    distribution) can be supplied at a discount of 25 per cent. for
    cash, carriage forward, if they apply directly to the above
    Society.




INDEX.


                                     Page
    Almonds, Salted                    85
    Almond Soup                        52
    Ambrosia                          101
    Apple Custard                     105
    Apple Fritters                    107
    Apricots, Poached                 106
    Artichoke Soup                     48
    Artichokes, Fried Chinese          55
    Artichokes, Green                  55
    Asparagus Soufflé                  77
    Aspic jelly                        87

    Baked Nuttoria                     62
    Bakewell Pudding                  103
    Barley Water                      117
    Boiled Pudding, Plain             107
    Brawn, Picnic                      88
    Brazil Nut Soup                    50
    Bread, How to Make                112
    Bread, White                      115
    Bread, Plain Currant              115
    Bread, Wholemeal                  114
    Bread Pudding                     101
    Breakfast Dish, A                  79
    Broth, Brown Haricot               49
    Broth, Mock Chicken               123
    Brown Bean Cutlets                 58
    Brown Haricot Soup                 49
    Brussels Sprouts Sauté             78
    Brussels Sprouts, à la Simone      80
    Buns, Plain Currant               115
    Bun Cake, Sultana                 116

    Cabbage Salad                      91
    Cabbage Soufflé                    77
    Cakes, Sultana                    116
    Cakes, Small                      103
    Carnos Sauce                       98
    Carnos Soup                        54
    Carrot Soup                        54
    Cauliflower au Gratin              83
    Celery Soup                        53
    Castle Puddings                   102
    Cheese and Tomato Paste            92
    Cheese Sauce                       98
    Cheese Rissoles, Savoury           78
    Cheesecakes, Lemon                110
    Cheese Straws                     116
    Chestnut Soup                      48
    Chestnut and Mushroom Pudding      82
    Chestnut Soufflé                   77
    Chestnut Stew                      85
    Chestnut Cream                    111
    Christmas pudding                  99
    Coconut Sauce                      97
    Coconut Custard, Baked            109
    Coconut Cream                     111
    Corsican Dish, A                   78
    Creamed Macaroni                   70
    Croquettes, Milanese               81
    Croûtes à la Valencia              84
    Curry Gravy                        95
    Custard Moulds                    103
    Curried Cauliflower                83
    Curried Rice and Peas              72
    Curried Lentils                    82

    Dinner Rolls                      115

    Eggs à la Crême                    74
    Egg and Cress Sandwiches           91
    Eggs à l'Italienne                 75
    Eggs, Mayonnaise                   74
    Eggs, Scrambled                    75
    Eggs Florentine                    74
    Empress Pudding                   108

    Figs, Jellied                     101
    Fillets of Mock Sole               56
    Frittamix Rissoles                 85
    Fruit Drink                       118
    Fruit Sauce                        98
    Fruit Salad                        99
    Fruitarian Mincemeat              110

    Galantine alla Bolognese           86
    Gateau aux Fruits                 106
    Gingerade                         118
    Ginger Pudding                    108
    Glaze, Marmite                     97
    Gravy Soup                         49
    Gravies                            94
    Gravy Piquante                     95
    Gravy, Rich Brown                  96
    Gravy, Plain Brown                 95
    Green Pea Cutlets                  58
    Green Pea Soufflé                  76
    Green Pea Soup                     51
    Green Pea Galantine                88
    Gravy, Quick Lunch                 98
    Gruel, Lentil                     124

    Haricot Soup, Brown                49
    Haricot Soup, White                52
    Haricot Cutlets                    59
    Haricot Cutlets, White             61
    Haricot Meat, Potted               92
    Haricot, Potted White              90
    Haricot, Potted Savoury            91
    Haricot Brown Broth               123
    How to Cook Rice                   70
    Hygiama Apple Purée               123

    Jelly, Orange                     108
    Jugged Nuttose                     64
    Julienne Soup                      50

    Kedgeree                           78

    Lentil and Potato Sausages         65
    Lentil Soufflé                     77
    Lentil Soup, Green                 51
    Lentil Soup, Egyptian              50
    Lentil Cutlets                     61
    Lentil Cutlets, Green              81
    Lentils, Curried                   82
    Lentil Croquettes                  62
    Lentil Pudding                     84
    Lentils, Potted Savoury            90
    Lentil Gruel                      124
    Lemon Creams                      104
    Lemon Cheesecakes                 110
    Lemon Jelly                       110
    Lemon Sponge                      106
    Linseed Tea                       124

    Macaroni à la Turque               69
    Macaroni Cutlets                   69
    Macaroni, Creamed                  70
    Macaroni Napolitaine               69
    Macaroni, Savoury                  70
    Macaroni and Tomato Pudding        70
    Malted Milk Prune Whip            125
    Malted Milk Jelly                 125
    Malted Milk with Iced Fruit       125
    Malted Milk, Effervescent         125
    Marbles, Savoury Golden            82
    Marmalade Pudding                 102
    Marmite Glaze                      97
    Marmite Savoury Gravy              97
    Marmite Toast                      85
    Marmite Vegetarian Soup            52
    Mayonnaise Eggs                    74
    Mayonnaise Sauce                   97
    Milk Cheese                        93
    Minced Nut-Meat                    65
    Mock Chicken Broth                123
    Mock Chicken Rolls                 66
    Mock Turtle Soup                   49
    Mock Fish Cutlets                  56
    Mock Fish Roe                      56
    Mock Hake Steaks                   57
    Mock Hare Soup                     53
    Mock White Fish                    57
    Mock Chicken Cutlets               60
    Mock Lobster Shapes                87
    Mock Oyster Patties                55
    Mock Scallop Oysters               55
    Mock Steak Pudding                 66
    Mock Sweetbread Quenelles          61
    Mushroom Pie                       62
    Mushroom & Potato Croquettes       66

    Nut Croquettes                     60
    Nut Sandwiches                     90
    Nut-Meat à la Mode                 63
    Nut-Meat Rissoles                  64
    Nut-Meat Galantine             86, 89
    Nut-Meat Rolls                     89
    Nuttose Ragout                     64

    Oat-Cream                         124
    Oatenade                          117
    Omelet, A Simple                   73
    Omelette aux Fines Herbes          75
    Omelette aux Tomates               73
    Onions à la Mode Francaise         80
    Onion Soup                         54
    Orange Jelly                      108
    Oeufs Farcée en Aspic              75

    Parsley Sauce                      96
    Pea Soup                           53
    Picnic Brawn                       88
    Pine Kernel Timbale                68
    Plasmon Snow Cream                107
    Plum Puddings                 99, 100
    Potato Croquettes                  82
    Potato Purée                       80
    Potato Soup                        53
    Potatoes, Escalloped               81
    Prated Gruel                      124
    Protose Cutlets                    63
    Protose Rolls                      89
    Protose Pudding                    92
    Puff Pastry                       111

    Raised Pie                         87
    Raspberry Pudding                 104
    Rice à la Reine                   105
    Rice alla Romana                   71
    Rice, Milanese                     71
    Rice Cutlets, proteid               72
    Rice, Savoury                      71
    Rice, Sicilian                     72
    Rice Moulds, Creamed              101
    Rice and Peas, Curried             72
    Rice and Sultana Pudding          107
    Rice and Tomato Rissoles           73
    Rice Pudding, Savoury              84
    Rice Water                        118
    Risi Piselli                       73

    Salad Dressing                     93
    Salsify, Filleted                  57
    Sauce Hollandaise                  96
    Sauce Piquante                     95
    Sauce, Thick Brown                 98
    Savoury Lentil Roll                68
    Sausages, Neapolitan               84
    Savoury Rissoles                   78
    Savoury Sausages                   67
    Savoury Chestnut Mould             67
    Savoury Golden Marbles             82
    Savoury Nut-Meat Steaks            63
    Savoury Macaroni                   70
    Semolina Pudding                  109
    Semolina Lemon Pudding            104
    Semolina Moulds                   102
    Short Pastry                      110
    Soubise Soup, White                51
    Spinach and Eggs                   76
    Spinach à la Crême                 76
    Spinach Fritters                   79
    Spinach Soufflé                    76
    Stewed Prunes                     103
    Strawberry Cream                  102
    Strawberry Ice                    109
    Stuffed Yorkshire Pudding          65
    Sultana Pudding                   100
    Sultana Custard Pudding           105
    Sultana and Ginger Pudding        100
    Sultana Cakes                     116
    Swiss Roll                        105

    Tarragon Sauce                     96
    Tea and Coffee Substitutes        118
    Tomatoes, Baked Stuffed            79
    Tomatoes au Gratin                 80
    Tomato or Egg Sandwiches           90
    Tomato Soup                        50
    Tomato Galantine                   88
    Tomatoes, Grilled                  83
    Tomato Mayonnaise                  89
    Tomato Paste, Potted               92
    Tomato Sauce                       96
    Tomato Chutney                     97

    Vanilla Creams                    104
    Vanilla Ice                       109
    Vegetable Marrow, Baked            81
    Vegetable Marrow, Stuffed      59, 79
    Vegetable Stock                    48

    Walnuts, Purée of                  60
    Walnut Gravy                       94
    Walnut Pie                         67
    Wheatenade                        117
    White Sauce                        97
    White Windsor Soup                 54
    Walnut Cutlets                     58
    Walnut Rissoles                    59

    Yorkshire Pudding              65, 83




All workers for the upliftment and amelioration of Mankind are invited
to obtain from a Newsagent or Bookstall

    =The Herald of the Golden Age
    and British Health Review=

    (The Official Journal of The Order of the Golden Age).

[Illustration]

A Magazine founded to proclaim a Message of Peace and Happiness,
Health and Purity, Life and Power.

It advocates Physical, Mental, and Spiritual Culture in a practical
and helpful manner.

=_Illustrated. Quarterly. Price Threepence._=

=Edited by SIDNEY H. BEARD.=


It proclaims the advantages of the Fruitarian System of living, and
pleads for recognition of the rights of Animals, and the adoption of a
Natural, Hygienic, and Humane Dietary. It exalts true and progressive
Ideals and teaches sound philosophy.

It circulates in Fifty-Four Countries and Colonies.

It will be forwarded direct from the Publishing Offices for One
Shilling and Sixpence per annum, upon application to THE SECRETARY,
THE ORDER OF THE GOLDEN AGE, 153, 155, Brompton Road, London, S.W.

(=Specimen copies, threepence, post free=).


    _Trade Agents_: {  R. J. JAMES, 10, 11, 12, Ivy Lane, E.C.
                    {  MADGWICK & Co., 4, Ave Maria Lane, E.C.




=HELPFUL AND INSTRUCTIVE BOOKLETS.=


PHILANTHROPISTS AND SOCIAL REFORMERS Are invited to read and circulate
the following publications.


="The Testimony of Science in Favour of Natural and Humane Diet."=

    By SIDNEY H. BEARD. _Seventh Edition._

    _One Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Thousand._

    _Price_ 2d. (2-1/2d. _post free_); 2s. _per dozen_ (_post free_);
    15s. _per hundred_ (_post free_).

    _French Edition_, 20 Centimes. _German Edition_, 20 Pfennigs.

    A handy up-to-date booklet, full of expert evidence by eminent
    authorities in the Medical and Scientific world, athletic evidence
    and personal testimony of a convincing character, with references
    for the quotations. Every Food-Reformer and Lecturer will need
    this booklet.

CONTENTS:

    Flesh-Eating an Unnatural Habit.
    Flesh-Eating an Unnecessary Habit.
    Flesh-Eating a Cause of Disease.
    Uric Acid Maladies.
    Appendicitis.
    Cancer.
    Tuberculosis.
    The Sufficiency and Superiority of
    Fruitarian Diet.
    Experimental Evidence.
    Athletic Evidence.
    Personal Testimony.
    An Octogenarian's Experience.
    A Cloud of Witnesses.
    Man's Diet in the Future.
    A Physician's Forecast.
    Our Responsibilities and Opportunity.


="The Diet for Cultured People."=

By DR. JOSIAH OLDFIELD, M.A., D.C.L., L.R.C.P., M.R.C.S.

_Third Edition._ _Twentieth Thousand._ _Price_ 2d. (2-1/2d. _post
free_).


="How to Avoid Appendicitis."=

By DR. JOSIAH OLDFIELD, M.A., D.C.L., L.R.C.P., M.R.C.S.

_Tenth Thousand._ _Price_ 2d. (2-1/2d. _post free_).


="The Cruelties of the Meat Trade."=

By DR. JOSIAH OLDFIELD, M.A., D.C.L., L.R.C.P., M.R.C.S.

_Third Edition._ _Twenty-Fifth Thousand._ _Price_ 1d. (1-1/2d. _post
free_).

    Some eye-witness revelations of the cruelties of the Flesh
    Traffic.


="Errors in Eating and Physical Degeneration."=

By SIR WILLIAM EARNSHAW COOPER, C.I.E.

_Fifth Thousand._ _In Art Linen._ _Price_ 6d. (_post free_).

    An up-to-date book which reveals in a piquant and interesting
    manner the many Dietetic mistakes and transgressions that are
    being made by the British public, and the cost in suffering which
    they have to pay in consequence. Much useful information is
    contained in this book, in addition to Tables of Food Values, etc.


="Fruitarian Diet and Physical Rejuvenation."=

By O. L. M. ABRAMOWSKI, M.D., Ch.D., M.O.H.

(_Late Senior Physician to the District Hospital, Mildura,
Australia_).

_Twentieth Thousand._ _Price_ 2d. (2-1/2d. _post free_).

    A booklet giving the personal experiences of the Author concerning
    the rejuvenation of the body by means of Reformed Diet, and also
    the results obtained at the Mildura Hospital and Dr. Abramowski's
    own Sanitarium.


="Is Flesh-Eating Morally Defensible?"=

By SIDNEY H. BEARD.

_Ninth Edition._ _Forty-fifth Thousand._ _Price_ 3d. (_post free_).

    This Booklet has been the means of persuading a great number of
    men and women to abandon the carnivorous habit. Its readers have
    posted copies to their friends in all parts of the world.


="The Toiler and his Food."=

By SIR WILLIAM EARNSHAW COOPER, C.I.E.

_Fourth Edition._ _Fortieth Thousand._ _Price_ 1d. _Net_.

    A straight talk with the Working Classes about Diet.


="The Church and Food-Reform."=

By REV. A. M. MITCHELL, M.A.

_Tenth Thousand._ _Price_ 1d. (1-1/2d. _post free_).


="Is Meat-Eating Sanctioned by Divine Authority."=

By SIR WILLIAM EARNSHAW COOPER, C.I.E.

_Price_ 3d. (_post free_). 2s. _per dozen (carriage paid)_.

    An artistic booklet that is especially helpful in removing the
    prejudices and misconceptions of those who have been accustomed to
    think that the Bible justifies flesh-eating. Much light upon the
    subject, and information concerning correct interpretation of the
    Scriptures is given, and yet in such a reverent and scholarly way
    as not to offend the most orthodox.


="The Penny Guide to Fruitarian Diet and Cookery."=

By DR. JOSIAH OLDFIELD, M.A., D.C.L., L.R.C.P., M.R.C.S.

_Tenth Edition._ _Hundredth Thousand._ _Price_ 1d. (1-1/2d. _post
free_).

1s. 3d. _per dozen (post free)_; 7s. 6d. _per hundred (carriage
paid)_.


="Shall We Vivisect?"=

By DR. JOSIAH OLDFIELD, M.A., D.C.L., L.R.C.P., M.R.C.S.

_Price_ 1d. (1-1/2d. _post free_).


    THE ORDER OF THE GOLDEN AGE,
    153, 155, Brompton Road, London, S. W.




=THE LIVING TEMPLE,=

By Dr. J. H. KELLOGG, M.D.

(_Medical Director of the Battle Creek Sanitarium, Michigan, U.S.A._)

    =FULLY
    ILLUSTRATED=,
    including a
    number of fine
    coloured plates.

    [Illustration]

    568 pp.
    Price
    =Six
    Shillings=
    (post free).

This book must be seen to be appreciated, but the following brief
partial outlines of the most important chapters will afford some idea
of the helpful nature of the contents.


=The Miracle of Digestion.= The Organs of Digestion--Five Food
Elements, Five Digestive Organs--What the Saliva does--The Work of the
Gastric Juice--Other Uses of the Digestive Fluids.

=Dietetic Sins.= Eating for Disease--The Selection of Food--Cereal
Foods and Legumes, etc.--Erroneous Notions about Fruits--Predigested
Food Elements in Fruits--Fruit Juices Destroy Germs--The Medicinal Use
of Fruits--Fruit Soup--Fruit Cure for Constipation--The Fruit
Diet--Fruit a Cleansing Food--Diseases Due to Milk--Milk and Cream
from Nuts--Eggs.

=The Natural Way in Diet.= Why Fats Render Food
Indigestible--Objectionable Vegetable Fats--Chemical Bread
Raisers--Condiments the Cause of Gin Liver--Dextrinised Cereals--The
Daily Ration--Balanced Bills of Fare--Too Frequent Eating--The Purest
Water, etc.

=What to do in case of Sudden Illness or Accident.=
Fainting--Hemorrhage of the Lungs--Hemorrhage from the Stomach--A
Bruise--The Dressing of Wounds--Sprains, etc.

=The Breath of Life.= Proper Breathing--The Rate at which Air is
Needed--Cultivating Lung Capacity--Why we Breathe when asleep, etc.

=The Brain and the Nerves.= Feeling Cells and Working Cells--How
Habits are Formed--The Proper Function of the Sense of Taste--How to
have a Good Memory--Recent Interesting Discoveries about Nerve
Cells--Insomnia--Nerve Poisons--A Common Cause of Nerve
Exhaustion--How to Have a Clear Head--The Problem of
Heredity--Rational Mind Cure.


    THE ORDER OF THE GOLDEN AGE
    153, 155, Brompton Road, London, S.W.




_Fifth Thousand._

    =THE CANCER SCOURGE=
    =and How to Destroy it.=

    By ROBERT BELL, M.D., F.R.F.P.S.

    _Price_ ONE SHILLING _Net (post free 1/2)._

The latest pronouncement by this eminent Cancer Specialist on the most
terrible disease of our times.

       *       *       *       *       *

This book is written by a Physician who has witnessed many cures of
advanced cases of Cancer, and who speaks from the standpoint of forty
years' experience.

It contains 20 Art Plates, illustrating diagnoses from the Blood when
highly magnified, and proves by these object lessons the curability of
Cancer and the efficacy of treatment by Fruitarian Diet and Radium.


A FEW PRESS OPINIONS.

    "It is ... interesting and suggestive ... and it deserves a wide
    circulation."--_Manchester Courier._

    "Every year, in England and Wales, 30,000 people die of
    Cancer--all of which deaths are preventible. Dr. Bell's methods of
    preventing them are clearly and forcibly given, once again, in
    this little book."--_Daily Mirror._

    "The wide prevalence of this terrible disease demands that
    attention should be given to all endeavours to destroy it, and Dr.
    Bell is an authority whose words should be carefully studied and
    acted upon."--_Northern Whig._

    "This interesting little treatise is an able presentation of the
    natural method of dealing with Cancer."--_Two Worlds._

    "Dr. Bell is strongly of opinion that the Scourge is amenable to
    cure, and his remedy is the use of Radium in conjunction with a
    special kind of Fruitarian Diet. When one considers that every
    known remedy of the past has failed and that this suggested cure
    has no revolting methods, such as the knife of the surgeon, it
    should certainly receive the attention it merits."--_American
    Register._

    "The book should be worth reading to those interested in the
    subject."--_Irish News._

    "He (Dr. Bell) deems 'dietetic purification essential,' and
    explains his system, and it must be acknowledged that he is backed
    by very strong evidence, which he gives. His little volume is
    worthy of the closest consideration by all
    concerned."--_Letchworth Citizen._


    THE ORDER OF THE GOLDEN AGE,
    153, 155, Brompton Road, London, S.W.




    HORLICK'S
    MALTED MILK

    =MALTED BARLEY, WHEAT, and MILK in Powder Form.=


    =THE IDEAL FOOD DRINK
    FOR ALL AGES.=


    =Delicious, Nourishing, and Refreshing.=

[Illustration: =THE PACKAGE.=]

=HORLICK'S MALTED MILK=

¶ =IN THE HOME=, when used as a Table Beverage is more beneficial than
Tea, Coffee, Chocolate or Cocoa.

¶ =IS ESPECIALLY USEFUL IN PHYSICAL CULTURE= as it replaces waste
tissue and gives a feeling of fitness and staying power.

¶ =FOR BUSINESS MEN= it is the ideal quick lunch when time is
pressing. May be kept in the office and is prepared in a moment.

¶ =FOR THE AGED AND INVALIDS.= The lightest diet in combination with
the fullest nutriment--therefore gives best means of sustenance.

¶ =IN INFANT FEEDING= is the only scientific substitute for Human Milk
which perfectly simulates the action of the latter during digestion.

¶ =FOR GROWING CHILDREN.= Builds up and nourishes the constitution,
gives stamina and ensures healthy growth with development.


SERVED IN HOTELS, RESTAURANTS and CAFÉS--HOT OR COLD.


=Requires no Cooking.=

    Of all Chemists and Stores in Sterilised Glass Bottles,
      at 1/6, 2/6 & 11/-

    _Liberal Sample for trial free by post on request._

    =HORLICK'S MALTED MILK Co., SLOUGH, BUCKS,
    ENGLAND.=




    =The Secret of
    Perfect Health=

lies very largely in right diet. Our foods are made from the purest
and finest materials under the most hygienic conditions. They
include:--

    =NUT BUTTERS.= Most delicious. Food as well as fat. Much safer and
    go farther than dairy butter. Almond, =1/3=; Walnut, Coconut and
    Cashew, =1/=; Peanut, =9=d. per lb. The Almond Butter is specially
    recommended.

    =NUT CREAMS= are a delicacy for the healthy, and a delightful
    food-remedy to the ailing. Absolutely pure. Almond, 1/2-lb., =1/-=;
    Hazel, 1/2-lb., =1/-=; Coconut, 1/2-lb., =5=d.; Pine Kernel, 1-lb.,
    =1/8=.

    =NUT SOUPS=, made from Nut Cream and choice vegetables, are
    extremely nutritious and an excellent nerve and blood tonic. Can
    be served in a few minutes. In twelve varieties, =3=d. per drum.

    =FRITTAMIX.= Very savoury and digestible--can be prepared for
    table in a few minutes, requiring only the addition of water. Full
    directions on each package. Per packet, =2-1/2=d.; 1-lb. packets,
    =9=d.; 3-lb. tins, =2/2=; 6-lb. tins, =4/-=. Four
    varieties--Piquant, Mild, Walnut, Tomato.

    =NUTTER.= Pure, white and tasteless. Free from water and
    preservatives. Goes much farther and is much nicer and more
    wholesome than ordinary butter. Ideal for frying. Makes most
    delicious pastry and puddings. 1-1/2-lb. package, =1/-=; 3-lb. tins,
    =2/1=. Special prices for large consumers.

    =RECIPES= for the above and many other of our Specialities will be
    found in our _Fruitarian Recipes_, full of delightful suggestions;
    post free, =1-1/2=d.

=MAPLETON'S NUT FOOD CO., LTD., GARSTON, LIVERPOOL.=

Ask for them at your Stores.


WRITE TO-DAY

for a complete list of wholesome dainty Foods. We welcome
correspondence.

[Illustration: =MAPLETON'S NUT FOODS=]




=THE GOLDEN MEAN.=

White flour is a clogging constipating food that paves the way to
appendicitis, etc. Coarse wholemeal irritates the digestive tract and
wastes the nourishment that should remain in the body.

[Illustration: ="ARTOX" STONE GROUND=]

    ="ARTOX" Pure Wholemeal
    is the Golden Mean.=

It contains every atom of the wheat, but so finely ground that it will
not irritate the most delicate digestion. Its regular use acts like
magic in keeping the internal organs clear and clean.

YOU CAN MAKE EVERYTHING with it, even sponge cakes, AND IT MAKES
EVERYTHING NICER.


=Our Handsome Booklet=

"Grains of Common Sense," will tell you more about "ARTOX" and give
you recipes for a veritable banquet of delight. _Send for a post free
copy now._

"ARTOX" is sold by Health Food Stores and Grocers, 3-lb., 7-lb., 14-lb.
sealed linen bags; or 28lb, sent direct, carriage paid, for 5s.

    =APPLEYARDS, Ltd.=

    =(Dept. O.)
    ROTHERHAM.=

[Illustration: Grains of Common Sense]




    =I.
    H.A.=
    HEALTH
    FOODS

    Are the very

    =Basis
    of
    Food
    Reform.=


    They were the
    pioneers of the
    movement in
    this country
    and
    STILL STAND
    UNRIVALLED.

The following are a few of our Specialities:--

=GRANOSE.=

Acknowledged to be the most valuable family food of its kind. Granose
is wheat in the form of crisp, delicate flakes, thoroughly cooked and
so rendered highly digestible. While it is given to very young infants
with great success it is an all-round family food and is increasing in
popularity everywhere. Free Samples supplied to _bona fide_ inquirers.

=PROTOSE.=

A delicious substitute for meat guaranteed to be free from all
chemical impurities. Thoroughly cooked, highly nutritious and
digestible. Made entirely from choice nuts and wheat.

=AVENOLA.=

Makes superior porridge in one minute: also good as a basis for
vegetarian "roasts." Children are delighted with it for breakfast.
Very nourishing.

=NUTTOLENE.=

Without doubt the most delicate and tempting substitute for meat
pastes. Makes excellent sandwiches and is capable of a variety of
uses.

=HEALTH COFFEE.=

A wholesome beverage made entirely from cereals. Should be used in the
place of tea and ordinary coffee.

=I.H.A. HEALTH BISCUITS.=

The distinguishing feature of our biscuits is that they are absolutely
pure, nourishing, and digestible. We make a variety combining
wholesomeness with palatability.


_For further particulars and price list write_:--

=International Health Association, Ltd.,=

=Stanborough Park, WATFORD, HERTS.=




JUST HOW TO BEGIN

=A Healthy Change of Diet=

=Easily and Comfortably, Economically, Successfully,=

---Write to EUSTACE MILES, M.A., for---

=PERSONAL ADVICE.=

If, when you write to him, you mention any difficulties or ailments,
mark the envelope "Private and Personal."


_JUST TWO HINTS._

=1.= Instead of meat, use Eustace Miles proteid Food, ="EMPROTE,"= =The
Best Body-Building Food-Basis=. (Price per 1-lb. tin, =1/10=.)

=It is Ready for Use and Needs no Cooking.=

=2.= When you are in London, have all your meals at the

[Illustration]

=EUSTACE MILES RESTAURANT,=

=40, Chandos Street, Charing Cross, W.C.=

[Illustration]




=DRINK= DOLE'S Pure Hawaiian _PINEAPPLE JUICE._

[Illustration]

It is simply the expression of the =RIPE PINEAPPLE= without the
addition of sugar, water, preservatives, or any other thing.

It is preserved in bottles in its =FRESH STATE= by the most delicate
sterilizing process known to advanced science.

=PURE as the DEW.=

=QUENCHES THIRST. CURES DIPHTHERIA.=

_Send Post Card to_:--

=C. HOWE PIPER & Co.,=

=Factors and Sole Distributors for The Hawaiian PINEAPPLE Products
Co., Ltd., of HONOLULU. & St. George's House, Eastcheap.=

    Chief Office:--19, Devonshire Chambers,
    146, Bishopsgate, LONDON, E.C.




=YOU really should=

secure at once a copy of our new and revised list,

="A Guide to Good Things."=

It more than ever lives up to its title and should be in the hands,
not only of food-reformers, but of all who appreciate 'good things' at
the lowest possible prices, and 'good service' in the best and most
modern sense of that phrase.

It includes a comprehensive list of 'Health Foods' by all the leading
manufacturers as well as the many popular items of our own
introduction, and contains in addition a budget of useful information,
recipes, &c.


=Why not call to-day?=

and take lunch or tea, amid palms and flowers, in our well-known
Saloons, the handsomest of their kind in London; see the display of
fruit and flowers on the ground floor, and visit our Health Food
Stores (next door but one). Be sure and ask for a copy of our booklet.

=If you cannot call=

let us have your name and address and we will gladly send you a copy
post free, or if you enclose a penny stamp we will send in addition a
Sample of "FRUNUT." Write at once to

    =SHEARN'S,=
    THE WORLD'S LARGEST FRUITARIAN STORES,
    =231 & 234, TOTTENHAM COURT ROAD, W.,
    AND BRANCHES.=

    =Telephone:--Gen. 4907 and 6555.=




As Sweet as Nuts--More Nutritious than Beef.

HAVE =U= TRIED

---="PITMAN"=---

=NUTO CREAM MEAT=

THE WHITE MEAT

In the new shape tin. Made from Nuts and Corn, at the suggestion of
DR. GEO. BLACK, of Torquay, to provide a

_Delicate and White Meat free from Condiments and Preservatives_

For Invalids, the Convalescent, and the Robust.

Per Tin--1/2-lb., =6d.=; 1-lb., =10-1/2d.=; 1-1/2-lb., =1/2=; 3-lb., =2/-=

=TO TAKE THE PLACE OF POULTRY.=


="Pitman" Nut Meat Brawn=

is a delightful combination of "Pitman" Nut Meats (the outcome of
years of research to produce unique, delicately flavoured,
well-balanced and highly nutritious foods, each a perfect substitute
for flesh meat) and pure carefully seasoned Vegetable Jelly, so
blended to make an ---appetising dish suitable---

=FOR THE HOT WEATHER.=

Nothing could be nicer or more appreciated for picnics, etc. With
salad and Wholemeal bread and butter it provides a portable,
appetising and sufficing meal ready at a ---moment's notice.---

Per Tin, 1/2-lb. =6d.= 1-lb., =10-1/2d.= 1-1/2-lb. =1/2=

Ask your Stores for them, or

=SEND FOR A SAMPLE 1/2-lb. TIN=

of Meat or Brawn, post free 9d. The two for 1/4.

Orders of 5/-value carriage paid. Full Catalogue, post free 2 stamps,
with Diet Guide and copy of "Nuts, and all about them," 48 pages from


="PITMAN" HEALTH FOOD Co., 153, Aston Brook Street, BIRMINGHAM.=




[Illustration: =HONEY= =HONEY.= =HONEY=

QUEEN. WORKER. DRONE. =ENGLISH= =IRISH.= =SCOTCH.= =WELSH=.

HONEY HONEY]

=Specialitè--PURE CAMBRIDGESHIRE.=

=HONEY= is wholesome, strengthening, cleansing, healing, nourishing.

=HONEY= is a HEALTH FOOD of great value, and should be used regularly.

=HONEY= is excellent for child and adult, it is a Serviceable
Medicinal Agent.

=HONEY= is completely absorbed into the system by the action of the
blood. Difficulty is experienced in obtaining =PURE HONEY=.

=WE= trade in English, Irish, Scotch and Welsh Honey, and =GUARANTEE=
=ALL HONEY= sold by us to be =ABSOLUTELY PURE AND AS REPRESENTED=.

_Sold in screw-top Bottles: 7-lb., 14-lb., 28-lb. Tins. Prices on
application._


    =C. HOWE PIPER & Co.,= HONEY FACTORS AND PACKERS,
    BLINCO GROVE, CAMBRIDGE.




=The Rise of the Wholemeal Biscuit=

and especially of "Ixion" Biscuits into popular favour is a good sign
of the times. There is a great demand for wholemeal bread and
so-called standard bread just now, but

=GOOD BISCUITS ARE BETTER THAN THE BEST BREAD.=

The wise Food-Reformer prefers wholemeal biscuits to bread because
they not only give much-needed work to the teeth but induce the flow
of saliva and so assist the digestive organs most materially.

="IXION BISCUITS"= are made from the finest wheat most finely ground
by our own stone mills. =They are altogether free from yeast and all
chemical adulterants= and preservatives (including salt).

They are ideal food for growing children, as they contain everything
needed for good blood, bone, muscle, and nerve. The following may be
obtained at all Health Food Stores, or will be sent direct at prices
quoted.

="IXION" WHOLE WHEAT BISCUITS.= Rich in proteids, and the valuable
phosphates of the wheat, 7 lbs., =3/3=; 14 lbs., =5/6=; 28 lbs.,
=10/-=, carriage paid.

="IXION" SHORT BREAD BISCUITS.= Of delicate flavour and superlative
nutrient value, combined with easy mastication. 7 lbs., =4/-=; 14
lbs., =7/-=; 28lbs., =13/-=, carr. paid.

="IXION" DIGESTIVE BISCUITS.= Most agreeable, digestive, and
nutritious. 7 lbs., =4/-=; 14 lbs., =7/-=; 28 lbs., =13/-=, carriage
paid.

_Samples, etc., sent post free for 4d. stamps._

Sole manufacturers: =WRIGHT & CO. (Liverpool), Ltd., Vulcan St. Mills,
LIVERPOOL.=


="VEDA" BREAD IS A PERFECT FOOD.=

[Illustration: =VITALITY. DIGESTIBILITY. NUTRIMENT. ENERGY.=]

=A Few Reasons why "VEDA" should be on every Table.=

Because it is easily masticated and digested, delicious in flavour,
feeds the brain and nerves, builds good teeth and bones, relieves and
removes indigestion and constipation, nourishes and sustains the body
perfectly.

="VEDA BREAD"=

analysed and compared.

Flesh Builders (proteids), 35 per cent. more than fine white bread.

Rapid Heat and Force Producer, 87-3/4 per cent. more than fine white
bread.

Brain and Teeth Builders, 35 per cent. more than fine white bread.

="VEDA" BREAD Ltd., Spring Street, Hyde Park, W.= Telephone Nos.: 3702
PADDINGTON, 1446 RICHMOND.




    =Do not Forget to Try=

    =MELARVI BISCUITS.=

    =They melt in the Mouth.=

=NUTTORIA=

=SAVOURY NUT MEAT.=

Unequalled in flavour, richness and purity, considered the greatest
substitute for flesh ----meats known.----

For Roasts, Stews, Hashes, Sausage Rolls, Savoury Mince and Pies, &c.
Sustains prolonged muscular exertions and easily ----digested. 1/2-=lb.
Tin 7d.=----

At all Health Food Stores, &c.

Particulars and Price List of Health Foods from

=The LONDON NUT FOOD Co.,=

=465, BATTERSEA PARK ROAD, LONDON, S.W.=


=MANHU FOODS.=

[Illustration]

    =Flaked Wheat:= 2-lb. pkt.
    =6d.=

An Appetising Breakfast Food, Quickly Cooked, EASILY ASSIMILATED,
where DIGESTION is weak, a Natural ABSOLUTE

=Cure for Constipation.=

=FLAKED FOODS= in variety. =MANHU FLOUR= for =BROWN BREAD;= also
=MANHU DIABETIC FOODS= (Starch Changed), Palatable, Inexpensive.

_SUPPLIED AT ALL HEALTH FOOD STORES._

=MANUFACTURED BY The MANHU FOOD Co., Ltd., VAUXHALL MILLS, LIVERPOOL.
London Depot:--23, Mount Pleasant, Gray's Inn Road, W.C. Australian
Agent:--C. E. HALL, 12, McKillop Street, Melbourne.= _Send for full
particulars._




=ABBOTSHOLME SCHOOL, Derbyshire=

[Sidenote: =An Up-to-date Education for Boys=]

Where a Scientific Non-flesh Diet is supplied to pupils requiring
same.

The School, founded in 1889, has attracted attention throughout the
world.

A broad and liberal foundation enables the boy to discover for himself
where his especial bent lies. Specialisation follows at a later and
more responsible age, to prepare for the Universities or other higher
seats of learning, with a view to an active career in present day
conditions. Outdoor recreations over an estate of 133 acres. Fees £120
(and upwards) per annum. Instead of prizes, Awards--based on each
year's work--to a maximum of £30 per annum, open to all boys. Among
the Members of the Advisory Council are the Duke of Devonshire, the
Duchess of Sutherland, Sir Henry Craik, and other prominent educators
of England, Germany and America.

For full particulars see Prospectus.

    Head-Master--CECIL REDDIE, Fettes College,
    B.Sc. (Edin.), Ph.D. (magna cum laude), Göttingen.


[Sidenote: =Cromer Guild of Handicraft=]

ALL KINDS OF

=Metal Work, Enamelling, Jewellery, Design, Drawing, Sculpture.=

PUPILS RECEIVED.

=Director-Mr. H. H. STANSFIELD.=

In connection with the above there is a =Food-Reform Guest House at
East Runton,= (1 mile from Cromer).

GARDEN. SEA BATHING. TENNIS.

FOR TERMS APPLY TO

=Mrs. Stansfield, East Runton, Nr. Cromer, Norfolk.=




At the close of a Dainty Fruitarian Meal =A CUP OF DELICIOUS=

    =HYGIAMA THE RENEWING
    LIQUID FOOD=

imparts a pleasing finish. It is so delicious, so digestible, and so
complete in nourishing elements. Quickly prepared, it makes an ideal
emergency meal or light supper, is entirely free from the bad effects
of tea, cocoa and coffee, and exerts a remarkable remedial influence
where there is digestive or nervous weakness.

Full Particulars, Free Sample, and 64-page Booklet on Rational Diet,
post free.

=Hygiama Foods Co.,= Department 12, =CROYDON, SURREY.=

Also In Tablet and Biscuit form.

[Illustration]


=McCLINTON'S=

="COLLEEN" SOAP.=

    =Made from
    Vegetable Oils
    and Plant Ash.=

Its use keeps the Skin Soft, Clear and Smooth.

[Illustration]

=Dowager Duchess of Abercorn= writes:--"We have used Colleen Soap for
years and delight in it. It is so sweet and refreshing."

=Testimonials from over 200 Peeresses.=

    =Colleen Soap, 4-1/2d. per tablet. 3 tablets for 1/- Hibernia
    Shaving Soap Sticks and Cakes, 1/-each. Shaving Cream Opal Pots,
    6d. and 1/-each.=

From all Chemists and Health Food Stores. Send 2d. to Dept. W. (to
cover postage), for Samples--

=McCLINTON'S, Ltd., Donaghmore, IRELAND.=




    =ARCHEVA (DIGESTIVE) RUSKS.=
    =BRAND.=              4 Gold Medals.

    =Splendid for
    CHILDREN, INVALIDS
    and DYSPEPTICS.=

    [Illustration: ARCHEVA]

    [Illustration: RUSKS]

    =Recommended by the
    Medical Faculty.=

    =Free from Deleterious
    Matter. No DRUGS
    used.=

    =Excellent at ALL
    meals for
    EVERYONE.=

    =Palatable
    and Nourishing.=

    =A true
    Health Food.=

From all the leading Stores, Grocers, or Chemists. In 3 {SIZES OF
TINS: 5, 10 and 24 packets, each 10 Rusks. {VARIETIES: Plain, Medium
and Sweet.


Send 3d. stamps for Samples and Booklet to

=ARCHEVA RUSK Co. (Dept. L.), 93, Upper Thames Street, LONDON, E.C.,
England.=


=WISE COOKS USE MARMITE (THE PURE VEGETABLE EXTRACT).=

    MARMITE is absolutely pure
    Is an invaluable pick-me-up
    Strengthens as well as stimulates
    Is easily digested and economical
    Is recommended by medical profession
    Is used by Food-Reformers & Vegetarians everywhere

_The Lancet_ says: "This entirely vegetable Extract possesses the same
nutrient value as a well-prepared meat extract."

=OBTAINABLE AT ALL HEALTH FOOD STORES.=

=FREE SAMPLE= on receipt of penny stamp to pay postage by

=Marmite Food Extract Co., Ltd.,= =59, EASTCHEAP, LONDON, E.C.=




=The Order of the Golden Age=

_(A Philanthropic Society)._

=Founded 1895.=

Advocates the adoption of a natural and hygienic dietary as a
preventive of Disease, a practical remedy for Physical Deterioration,
and an efficacious way of lessening human suffering and sub-human
pain.

The Fruitarian system of living makes a hygienic and humane life
possible, and tends to promote Health, Strength and Longevity.

Guide-Books to Fruitarian Diet and Cookery, and other literature 1/4
containing information upon every aspect of this important question
are published, and can be obtained at the International Offices.

The Hon. Secretaries will gladly give advice to enquirers concerning
this Reform.

=153, 155, Brompton Road, London, S.W., England.=

    Office Hours: 10 to 5.
       Saturdays: 10 to 2.

Telegrams: "REDEMPTIVE," LONDON. Telephone: Kensington 1341.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Comprehensive Guide-Book to Natural,
Hygienic and Humane Diet, by Sydney H. Beard

